---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 November 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-11-21
---

FRIDAY, 21 NOVEMBER 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:04.

The House Chairperson Mr A C Nel took the Chair  and  requested  members  to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDERS OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I move without notice:

   That after the Third Order precedence be given to Orders No 11 and 12
   under Further Business.

Agreed to.

                             SUSPENSION OF RULES
                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
Order printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party be
adopted.

   That the House —

     1) suspends Rule 253(1)(b), which  provides  that  the  debate  on  the
        Second Reading of a Bill that has not been referred to  a  committee
        may not commence before at least three  working  days  have  elapsed
        since the Bill was introduced, for the purposes  of  conducting  the
        Second Reading debate on the National Youth Development Agency  Bill
        [B 82 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) today;


     2) subject to the concurrence of the  National  Council  of  Provinces,
        suspends Joint Rule 154(2), which provides that  the  Joint  Tagging
        Mechanism may not classify a Bill before the expiry  of  the  period
        stated in the Announcements,  Tablings  and  Committee  Reports,  in
        respect of the  Bill  (see  Announcements,  Tablings  and  Committee
        Reports, 20 November 2008, p 2321); and


     3) subject to the concurrence of the National Council of Provinces, for
        the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate  today  on  the
        above-mentioned Bill, suspends Joint  Rule  220(2),  which  requires
        that a translation of a Bill’s official text  must  be  received  by
        Parliament at least three days before the  formal  consideration  of
        the Bill by the House in which it was introduced.

Agreed to.

      GREATER ACCESS TO COMMUNICATION FOR ALL WILL STRENGTHEN DEMOCRACY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr R D PIETERSE (ANC): Voorsitter, die ANC glo dat kommunikasie ’n
belangrike rol speel in die verdieping van ons demokrasie, die aansporing
van ’n kultuur van menseregte, en ’n sleutelpilaar is in die transformasie
van ons land.

Daar is egter steeds menige Suid-Afrikaners, wat vernaamlik woonagtig is in
plattelandse gebiede, wat tot op hede nie die voorreg het om televisie te
kyk of om na ’n radio te luister nie. Daar word geraam dat omtrent vyf
miljoen Suid-Afrikaners nie toegang het tot radio of televisie nie.

Met die uitdaging geïdentifiseer, het die Departement van Kommunikasie, die
SABC en Sentech, as staatsbeheerde maatskappy, saamgestaan om hierdie
uitdaging aan te spreek. Tydens een van die talle ANC-izimbizo het die
gemeenskap in Heuningsvlei gesê dat hulle nie deel van ’n breë Suid-
Afrikaanse familie voel nie aangesien hulle nie bewus is van die
aangeleenthede van die land nie, omdat hulle nie toegang tot hierdie
informasie het nie.

Die regering, gelei deur die ANC, is egter vasbeslote om te verseker dat
die kommunikasie en verspreiding van informasie elke deel van ons land
bereik om sodoende demokrasie te versterk. Amandla! (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr R D PIETERSE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC believes that communication
plays an important role in strengthening our democracy and promoting a
culture of human rights. It’s also a key pillar in the transformation of
our country.

There are, however, to date, a great number of South Africans, residing
mainly in rural areas, who still do not have the privilege of watching
television or listening to a radio. It is estimated that approximately five
million South Africans do not have access to radio or television.

The identification of this challenge led the Department of Communication,
the SABC, and Sentech, as a company managed by the government, to join
hands in addressing this challenge. During one of the many ANC izimbizo,
the community of Heuningsvlei said that they do not feel part of a greater
South African family, since they are not aware of matters regarding the
country because they have no access to this information.

The government, led by the ANC, is, however, determined to ensure that
communication reaches every corner of our country and that the
dissemination of information takes place, so as to strengthen our
democracy. [Amandla!]

          FRAUDULENT AND FAKE MATRIC EXAMINATION PAPERS IN BALLITO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Chairperson, 18 matric pupils from Ballito in KwaZulu-
Natal may have to repeat this year as the school they have been attending
is not registered with the Department of Education.

The school principal downloaded fake and fraudulent papers from the
Internet, pasted the Department of Education logo on them and gave them to
the pupils to write matric. The papers had no security features such as the
barcode, and the matric examination numbers issued were also fake. The
situation was discovered quite by accident when a parent of one of the
affected learners happened to see a paper written by another school and
realised that the two papers were completely different.

Whilst a case of fraud against the principal has been lodged, the impact on
the learners is, indeed, far-reaching. It is hoped that the Minister of
Education will consider the matter and allow the learners to take special
supplementary examinations early next year in an effort to reduce the
damage.

              IMPACT OF FLUCTUATING OIL PRICE ON COST OF LIVING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E J LUCAS (IFP): Chairperson, the alarming rate at which the price of
crude oil increased earlier this year left many people in shock and caused
most businesses to raise the prices of their goods significantly in order
to cover their costs and earn a profit.

As per usual, those who were most harshly affected by these increases were
the poorest members of our society, as the high cost of fuel, combined with
the shortage of certain basic food types, made everyday necessities
unaffordable.

The decreases in the price of crude have been just as sudden and
significant as the increases were. While I do understand the volatility of
the rand has a great impact, the prices of petrol and diesel have dropped
and it seems as if they will continue to do so.

While this has provided some relief for car owners, the benefits have not
translated into noticeable decreases in the prices of essential goods and
services, such as transportation, which consume the biggest portion of
these consumers’ disposable income. Thank you.

       LAUNCH OF LIVING CONDITIONS SURVEY TO MEASURE EXTENT OF POVERTY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N D NGCENGWANE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC believes that combating
poverty is not a gesture of charity; it is an act of justice. It is the
protection of a fundamental human right: the right to dignity and a decent
life.

While poverty persists, there is no true freedom. Statistics SA last
Tuesday launched a new survey to be known as the Living Conditions Survey,
LCS. The survey is aimed at collecting data to measure the extent of
poverty in South Africa. The data will be collected from 30 000 households
through a combination of questionnaires and diaries during the survey
period, which will run over 12 months.

This survey will cover people from all walks of life in both rural and
urban areas, while also allowing for a deeper understanding of the nature
of poverty in relation to the major shifts in policy and trends in the
economy. It will also indicate other ways of dealing with poverty in a
wider approach and will seek to understand the people’s own understanding
of poverty.

The ANC’s responses to poverty seek to empower people to access economic
opportunities while creating a comprehensive social safety net to protect
the most vulnerable in our society. This survey will enhance our efforts to
fight poverty. I thank you.

      NEED FOR REVISION OF EDUCATION SYSTEM TO ELIMINATE ILLITERACY AND
                                 INNUMERACY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, OECD, has, at the request of the national Department of
Education, examined the education system in South Africa. The report has
praise for education reform since 1994 in the areas of legislation, policy
development, curriculum reform and delivery of education.

There are, however, challenges that still stare the department in the face,
such as education outcomes and labour market relevance. It has been
reported widely that outcomes of our education system leave much to be
desired. Pupils from our schools are still being churned out illiterate and
innumerate. It will not do us any good to keep saying we are doing our best
when that best is worse than was offered in the past.

Legions of the unemployed keep swelling the ranks of the jobless. Greater
efforts have to be mounted to ensure that teaching is effective. After all,
if children are poorly taught, they will remain a generation of liabilities
as they cannot be recalled, as is done with defective products. If they
battle at school, they may not be interested in Adult Basic Education and
Training when they grow older, let alone wish to continue private studies
to improve their lot.

According to that report of the OECD, the national and provincial
Departments of Education have yet to come up with ways and means of
promoting and supporting changes in the interest of all young people and
others – all this in the face of shortages of financial and human
resources.

We in the UCDP know that education is still in the process of transition
and it will take time and adequate resources, coupled with nerves of steel,
for policy-makers to make that reform a reality. I thank you. [Time
expired.]

                   COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGY AGAINST MALARIA

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mrs R J MASHIGO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government will
continuously strive to reduce cases of TB, diabetes, malnutrition, maternal
death and malaria. Over and above this, the impact of the HIV and Aids
pandemic requires a massive joint effort of state and all sectors of
society so as to reverse and finally eradicate it.

Government will intensify its implementation of the comprehensive strategy
against this pandemic and mobilise all sectors and all citizens to play
their role.

Last Friday, 14 November, health Ministers from the SADC area marked
malaria day by spraying houses at Mamnfene Village in Northern KwaZulu-
Natal Village in Northern KwaZulu-Natal with DDT pesticide. Spraying houses
with this pesticide is one of the easiest ways in which malaria - a disease
which kills hundreds of people in the region every year - can be prevented.

Malaria-prone countries are caught in a vicious cycle of disease and
poverty, which slows the country’s economic growth, discourages foreign
investment and tourism and affects the development of territories and
people’s choices of economic activities.

However, they acknowledge the increased investment that has been made and
the political commitment of governments of the region, the continent and at
international level.

The significant decline in the parasite prevalence since the commencement
of the Lubombo Special Development Initiative, which promotes the use of
indoor residual spraying, demonstrates clearly the power of united action
of all the countries in the SADC region. Thank you very much, Chairperson.

            SOCIETY TO OBSERVE 16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM AGAINST ABUSE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M MDLALOSE (Nadeco): Chairperson, Nadeco believes that the family is
the essential unit in building a society, community or nation. With the 16
Days of Activism approaching, we wish to remind all parents, uncles,
aunties and grandparents that we need to raise the self-esteem of our
children ...

... bazihloniphe. Asigqugquzele uthando,ukuzihlonipha, ukuzethemba,
nokufunda kanye nokuthanda ukusebenza kubantwana. Loko kuzosiza ukunciphisa
udlame nokungaziphathi kahle esizweni. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... so that they can respect themselves. Let us instil in our youth love,
self-respect, and confidence and promote education as well as the culture
of working. That will help in reducing violence and misbehaviour in
society. Thank you.]

                      LAWLESSNESS IN KUNGWINI, GAUTENG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H WEBER (DA): Chairperson, the absolute lawlessness in Kungwini,
Gauteng, is reaching proportions never seen before in a civilised society.
A farmer was murdered last week and another was seriously injured and his
wife murdered yesterday. An old man died and was left on the pavement for
about three hours before anybody came to remove the body. This is beside
the spate of rapes and robberies in and around the town.

The DA offers its condolence to all the families affected by these
atrocities and calls upon the Department of Safety and Security to address
this serious state of affairs.

Adding to this state of lawlessness, on Monday the municipal offices were
held up shortly before 9:00 by armed robbers who allegedly stole R200 000.
The DA wants to know: Where were the security guards who are employed at
great expense and why was such a large amount of money not banked before
the weekend? By all accounts such an amount is not covered by insurance due
to negligence on the part of the personnel.

Many questions need to be answered, including how long it took the police
to arrive at the municipal offices, given that the police station is
roughly 200 metres away from the municipal offices. Thank you.

                      CRITICAL FINDINGS IN SIDA REPORT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M W MAKGATE (ANC): Chairperson, a UN draft report has revealed that
South Africa has made strides in creating opportunities for marginalised
South Africans, including women and children.

The draft report on the progress made in the implementation of the Sida
Report, released by the Minister in the Presidency, Manto Tshabalala-
Msimang, in Pretoria on Friday, highlighted the strides made by South
Africa in mainstreaming equal rights for men and women and its continued
efforts to eliminate any gender-based discrimination.

Some of the critical findings of the draft report indicate that South
Africa has increasingly created opportunities for mainstreaming gender
equality goals and that the attitudes regarding the place of women in
society has generally improved. It also showed that significant progress
has been made in protecting the rights of women workers, particularly
domestic workers.

The ANC-led government has long realised and appreciated the real and
potential role of women and that their liberation from patriarchy was and
should be an integral part of the new democracy. The report confirms the
correctness of our efforts. I thank you.

                    TRIBUTE TO THE LATE ZENZELE PHAKATHI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S P LEBENYA (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP today pays tribute to the IFP
stalwart Comrade Zenzele Phakathi, who passed away late last week. Comrade
Phakathi was the former IFP Youth Brigade chairperson from 1987 to 1999. He
was a member of the IFP Youth Brigade national executive committee; he was
an IFP Youth Brigade publicity secretary. He was a former IFP Youth Brigade
provincial chairperson. Comrade Phakathi was the chairperson of the
national youth development forum and he was also the co-founder of the IFP
Alliance Student Movement, Sadesmo. He was a former chairperson of the
youth commission in KwaZulu-Natal.

We pay homage to an honourable servant of our party and a man whose
dedication and commitment to serving our nation and our young people, in
particular, was exemplary. Comrade Phakathi was a great politician, a man
of integrity and honour. He will be sorely missed.

The IFP will forever treasure the contribution that Comrade Phakathi made
to the struggle of youth development in South Africa. Comrade Phakathi was
a youth development activist and he strongly believed that youth
development should focus on education and training, job creation and
enabling young people to realise their full potential.

         FF PLUS USED BY CONSERVATIVE ELEMENTS IN THE MEDIA IN RUGBY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Chairperson, during yesterday’s sitting of the
House, the hon Mr Spies submitted a statement on behalf of the FF Plus that
pointed to alleged comments made by an ANC member serving on the Portfolio
Committee on Sport and Recreation. The basis of the statement is highly
questionable since the hon Spies did not attend the committee meeting. In
fact, the FF Plus is not part of the committee.

It is unfortunate and disingenuous for the FF Plus to be a conduit used by
conservative elements in the media which have lost all objectivity in
dealing with the state of rugby.

Where was the FF Plus when Saru questioned the coaching credentials of
Peter De Villiers upon his appointment as national coach by stating that he
was appointed for reasons other than rugby? What position did the FF Plus
take when Ziningi Shibambo was humiliated and abused by white male
spectators at Coca Cola Park? What did the FF Plus say when Llewellyn
Lewinson, the chairman of the East Rand Rugby Club, a black spectator, was
abused and beaten up in front of his wife and children after the Falcons
lost to the Platinum Leopards at Bosman stadium in Brakpan last month? What
did the FF Plus say when a black spectator was knocked unconscious by a
group of white men after the Currie Cup final last month? These are the
realities we need to tackle head-on to address inequity and racism in
rugby. The truth may be uncomfortable and painful to some, but it must be
spoken.

The ANC will continue to be the voice of the marginalised, the voiceless
and the oppressed. Amandla! [Applause.]

            ALLETATIONS BY FF PLUS REGARDING MIDVAAL MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W P DOMAN (DA): Voorsitter, die VF Plus was ook minus die waarheid oor
hulle ledeverklaring hier in die Parlement by monde van die agb Spies oor
Midvaal-munisipaliteit wat deur die DA regeer word. Die agb lid het beweer
dat Midvaal-munisipaliteit net van een prokureur, wat ’n groot DA-
ondersteuner is, gebruik maak. Die waarheid is dat die munisipaliteit van
sewe prokureursfirmas gebruik maak.

Die agb lid het verder beweer dat dieselfde prokureur ’n kontrak met die
munisipaliteit het om sierstene te verskaf ter verfraaiing van die dorp.
Dit is van alle waarheid ontbloot, die prokureur het nog nooit enige ander
kontrak hoegenaamd behalwe vir prokureurswerk met die munisipaliteit gehad
nie.

Die agb lid het ook ’n ou koei van 2005 bygetrek in sy verklaring, naamlik
dat die burgemeester van munisipale vervoer en munisipale werkers gebruik
gemaak het om bome by haar woning te laat plant. Die plaaslike Speaker het
die saak al lankal ondersoek en bevind dat die burgemeester totaal
onskuldig is.

Die VF Plus moet oppas dat hulle nie bekend word as die “VF Minus die
Waarheid” nie. Indien hulle voortgaan met hulle ongekontroleerde wilde
bewerings, sal hulle “Plus” verander in ’n minus by die stembus. Miskien is
dit suur druiwe, want by Midvaal-munisipaliteit het die VF Plus agteruit
geboer van een na nul verteenwoordigers met die laaste verkiesing. Die
Afrikaners daar stem vir die DA.

Daar is genoeg wat verkeerd is in die landadministrasie dat die VF Plus,
minus die waarheid, na strooihalms gryp. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Chairperson, the FF Plus were also less than truthful
about their member’s statement here in Parliament, delivered by hon Spies
about the Midvaal Municipality that is managed by the DA. The hon member
alleged that the Midvaal Municipality only uses the services of one
attorney, who is a big DA supporter. The truth is that the municipality
uses the services of seven legal firms.

The hon member further alleged that the same attorney has a contract with
the municipality to provide ornamental stones to decorate the town. It is
completely devoid of any truth, since the attorney has never had any other
contract with the municipality, apart from rendering a legal service

The hon member also included some old story from 2005 in his statement,
namely that the mayor made use of municipal transport and the services of
municipal workers to plant trees at her house. The local Speaker had
investigated the case long ago and came to the conclusion that the mayor is
totally innocent.

The FF plus must be careful that they are not branded the “FF Minus the
Truth”. If they continue with their uncontrolled and wild accusations,
their “Plus” will change into a minus at the ballot-box. Maybe it is a case
of sour grapes, because at Midvaal Municipality the FF Plus went downhill
from one to zero representatives with the last election. The Afrikaners
there vote for the DA.

There is enough at fault with the administration of the country that the FF
Plus, minus the truth, grabs at straws. [Applause.]]

           ANC PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCY OFFICE VISIT TO EIKENHOF

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G D SCHNEEMAN (ANC): Chairperson, the Eikenhof informal settlement,
which falls within the Johannesburg municipal area, has been part of a DA
ward for many years. Having been recently deployed to the Johannesburg
South ANC parliamentary constituency office, PCO, a visit was undertaken to
Eikenhof, where it was found that the community was living without access
to sanitation.

The ANC PCO met with the Johannesburg Metropolitan Council to discuss the
community’s needs. Within three weeks, chemical toilets were placed
throughout Eikenhof. Additional water tanks are to be delivered, which will
increase the supply of water.

Discussions are also taking place with City Power for the possible
provision of high mast lights, which would improve the safety and security
of residents. The community of Eikenhof has indicated that the provision of
sanitation has restored their dignity. They further added that their trust
in the ANC remains strong, as they know that the ANC cares and is committed
to improving their living conditions and to the creation of a better life
for all. Thank you.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): As some parties didn’t use their slots,
the ANC and DA have additional slots.

            ANC STANZA BOPAPE BRANCH VISITS VICTIMS OF XENOPHOBIA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H P MALULEKA (ANC): Chairperson, on 4 November 2008 the ANC Branch at
Stanza Bopape Village in Tshwane, together with the Charity and Faith
Mission Church, the municipal council, led by its mayor, and some embassies
in the City of Tshwane, visited foreigners who had been displaced as a
result of the so-called xenophobic attacks.

The Minister of Social Development and our Speaker took an active part in
this process and gave their active support in helping with the resettlement
process. Individuals and families who were identified for this resettlement
were all successfully resettled. The ANC wishes to commend all those who
participated in this humane act of solidarity. Thank you.

      SERIOUS SEWERAGE INFRASTRUCTURE PROBLEMS AT MAKHADO MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M SWATHE (DA): Chairperson, the municipality of Makhado in the Limpopo
Province has a serious problem regarding unmaintained, aged sewerage
infrastructure. The infrastructure is old and in a shocking state. Sewage
runs through the streets unchecked. Sewerage plants and sewerage dams are
not working. Pumps are broken. This has been a problem for seven years and
nothing is being done about it.

Wetlands and boreholes around Makhado are contaminated and polluted by
sewage that runs uncontrolled. People around dumping sites are in danger
because rubbish and sewage run through their houses. Two rivers, the
Tshipise and Nandoni, and the Albasini Dam are contaminated by sewage.
Boreholes and underground water are polluted. People and animals use that
water. Streams and wetlands are contaminated. Farmers use water for
irrigation, which in the long run might put people’s lives at risk.

Sewage treatment plants are not working. The Municipality has neglected
infrastructure. There is no maintenance by either the local or Vhembe
District Municipality. It is the ordinary people who are suffering from
these kinds of problems. Sewerage and toilet pipes are leaking. The
University of Venda conducted research and found that the water tested
positive for e-coli.

The DA urges the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to take action in
order to address this pressing issue and save lives. We do not want to
react only when people are sick as a result of opportunistic diseases such
as cholera and diarrhoea. We’ve seen what happened at Ukhahlamba District
Municipality, where babies lost their lives. We therefore want the Minister
to take urgent action to address this problem before it is too late. The
Minister must act against the responsible municipalities as her department
is the custodian of water affairs and forestry. There is a high risk of
damage to the veld and human life. Thank you. [Applause.]

      SERIOUS SEWERAGE INFRASTRUCTURE PROBLEMS AT MAKHADO MUNICIPALITY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, we
note the statements made and commend members for raising issues of
importance in this House.

We agree with the sentiments that reflect on hon members’ sense of
responsibility as public representatives to be true to their conscience as
agents of good governance and to be accountable in terms of their
deployment as Members of Parliament, all of which is done in the spirit of
patriotism.

Yes, hon Schneemann, the ANC lives and the ANC cares. On all those issues
that have been raised, it may just be a question of information that as the
ANC government we’ve actually acted, and we are acting, in some of those
areas concerning which issues were raised.

One example is the Makhado Municipality in Limpopo, as indicated, where
recently the ANC government has actually acted to address the situation. As
I indicated, we will follow up on some of those other issues that have been
raised in these statements. Thank you.

              IMPACT OF FLUCTUATING OIL PRICE ON COST OF LIVING

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Chairperson, I
want to respond to the statement by Mr Lucas and to agree with him that the
phenomenon he described is indeed a worrying one. The moment an imported
item’s price goes up, all other users of these inputs put up their prices.
But the moment the price goes down, well, then there is a long delay and a
lot of stickiness in prices going down.

He is quite correct that there are other factors at work here, including
the change in the value of the currency, and so on. But I think that in
general this is a significant problem we are concerned about. As Mr Lucas
knows, we don’t have any generalised price control in this country. So
there is nothing we can do directly in terms of this. But I just want to
say that through legislation passed in Parliament this year, we have
strengthened the Competition Act. As the Ministry of Trade and Industry, we
will be encouraging an energetic and proactive approach by the competition
authorities, more so than they have been doing up to now, to look at any
cases of collusion or where collusion is responsible for this situation and
is keeping prices unfairly high.

We have also introduced consumer legislation which should strengthen the
hands of consumers. I think we must be willing to use these instruments
energetically in the interests of our people and to combat a situation
where ordinary consumers are not going to benefit from a reduction in the
oil price in particular. Thank you very much.

                    TRIBUTE TO THE LATE ZENZELE PHAKATHI

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I think I need to join
the hon Lebenya in saluting Mr Zenzele Phakathi. Indeed, in my previous
capacities as a young person, I had the honour to work with him on
countless occasions.

Like all of us in our youth, he was quite militant, yet when the time for
peace came, he was also able to lead his constituency to ensure that they
also supported peace endeavours and that we smoked the peace pipe together.
It is therefore appropriate that we should convey to his family and his
organisation our deepest condolences and hope that many young people will
draw lessons from his life. Thank you.

      SERIOUS SEWERAGE INFRASTRUCTURE PROBLEMS AT MAKHADO MUNICIPALITY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I rise to respond
to the statement made by the DA around problems of pollution and
contamination of our water resources, particularly in the area of Makhado.

I have said in this House before that there are municipalities that are
struggling with the maintenance of infrastructure. We have intervened as a
department. In terms of the allocations we received, we have R500 million
that is to be invested in the refurbishment and upgrading of
infrastructure. It is totally unacceptable that those municipalities that
can afford to do this are not refurbishing or doing their operational
maintenance.

So, we have decided, as a department, to be very strong in our regulatory
function to the extent that we are going to have what we call an
enforcement and compliance blitz week, from 24 to 28 November, during which
we are going to go to all areas and all transgressors to issue them with
directives and disconnect and break down structures that have been set up
illegally - whether to steal water or divert water. We will accompany the
police as they make arrests in cases where we have issued directives and no
action has been taken by the transgressor.

We are going to take very serious steps from now onwards. We hope that
those few municipalities – because there are very few areas that are
noncompliant – will be assisted to comply. But in areas where they can
afford to refurbish and upgrade infrastructure, we will definitely take
serious action.

Regarding the toilet structures that have not been built correctly, I think
we have to put this into context and say that having given 10 million more
South Africans access to sanitation, some margin of error cannot be
excluded. There are some cases and some areas that we are aware of where
there has been substandard workmanship. But that cannot be placed at the
door of the ANC, which has sought to deliver both water and sanitation to
many more millions of people. In this case, whoever the contractor is must
be brought to book to ensure that the shoddy workmanship is repaired. But
if hon members want to join us throughout this enforcement blitz week, they
can liaise with the portfolio committee, whose chair has been invited to
these activities. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

                       STATEMENT BY MS KOHLER-BARNARD
                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Order! hon members, yesterday during
the Declaration of Vote by the hon D Kohler-Barnard on the South African
Police Service Amendment Bill, the hon Landers raised a point of order and
asked whether the hon member was misleading the House by stating that
section 179(2) of the Constitution gave the Directorate of Special
Operations authority to collect intelligence.

I undertook to study Hansard before ruling on the matter. Having now had an
opportunity to study the unrevised Hansard, I wish to rule as follows: In
the course of her speech, hon Kohler-Barnard indeed said that –

  In terms of section 179(2) of the Constitution, provision was made for
  the intelligence-gathering function of the DSO.

It is clear that her interpretation of this particular constitutional
provision differs from the view held by the hon Landers. However, asking
the Chair to determine whether hon Kohler-Barnard was misleading the House
or not, places the Chair in the position of having to play arbiter in
regard to two contradicting arguments by the hon members.

It is not the function of the Chair to determine the veracity or otherwise
of the views held and espoused by members of the House, however outlandish
they may appear to be.

               REVIEW OF CHAPTER 9 AND ASSOCIATED INSTITUTIONS

                (Consideration of Report of Ad Hoc Committee)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): I’m informed that parties have
requested the opportunity to make declarations on this matter.

Declarations of vote:

Ms M SMUTS: The Chapter 9 Institutions are independent and outside of
government, which is why they are appointed by and accountable to
Parliament. Today, we adopt the ad hoc committee’s recommendation to
properly bring them home where they belong by establishing a unit on the
constitutional and other independent bodies under the wing of the Speaker.

Parliament has not looked after the Chapter 9 Institutions properly, with
the exception of the Auditor-General, who has a dedicated committee, and
one or two others. The Chapter 9 Institutions have often been reduced to
perfunctory hearings once or twice a year and are frequently neglected,
specially by the admittedly overworked Justice Committee. For example, the
Human Rights Commission Act predates the final Constitution and is
hopelessly inadequate. It also provided our previous President with an
excuse not to appoint the 11 commissioners we voted in at the last cycle
when, in fact, he had no discretion on the matter. The Human Rights
Commission has, therefore, been working with five commissioners all these
years and lately with four.

So it is symptomatic of Parliament’s whole attitude to the Chapter 9
Institutions that the ad hoc committee report itself, this book, suffered
the same neglect. We finished the work in July 2007, but this report very
nearly expired with this Parliament.

We therefore welcome this resolution because the introduction of the unit
now establishes a beachhead for further attention to be paid by the next
Parliament to the book full of recommendations from Sello Dithebe, the hon
Carol Johnson, the hon Jane Matsomela, a few others and me, as well as the
little big man who likes publicity.

The very best recommendation in the entire report is repeated in the
resolution, to my delight, and it is that money voted to the institution
should be dealt with as part of Parliament’s Vote. Eddie Trent, who drove
this issue in our ranks with me, will be as delighted as I am.

Bodies that are outside government should not be dependent on Ministries
for the defence of their budget requests and the transfer of monies. We
were delighted when the Treasury took the same view, because the fact is
that the departments soon presume that bodies to which they transfer funds
are agencies that are accountable to them – and that’s where the trouble
starts. These bodies are accountable to us, we should look after them and I
hope that this report is dealt with fully when the next Parliament comes
back. In the meantime, we support this resolution with great acclaim.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, much of what I wanted to say has already
been said by Ms Smuts. I agree with her, so I won’t repeat it.

It was obviously necessary after almost 15 years of democracy to revise the
Chapter 9 Institutions to determine whether they are still successful or
not, and if so, to what degree, and what recommendations we should make.

I was privileged to serve on the committee as the representative of the
IFP, and I wish to ... [Interjections.] Yes, I attended all of them and I
heard that in the Chief Whips’ Forum you said that we are not attending the
Justice Committee while you bloody well know that we sit in the reference
room. [Interjections.] I think you are very stupid!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Hon Van der Merwe, withdraw the word
“bloody”.
Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Of course, I will withdraw it. There are many other
words I can think of to replace it. I wish to pay tribute to Prof Kader
Asmal ...

The CHIEF WHIP MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. Is
it parliamentary for hon Van der Merwe to refer to hon members as stupid?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: It is common cause that we all know that, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): No, no, Mr Van der Merwe. Withdraw the
word “stupid”.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Yes, I withdraw that, sir. But I think Mr Jeffery got
the message.

Ms C B JOHNSON: Chairperson, the ad hoc committee had a very wide focus and
we did a comprehensive review. We looked at, amongst other things, the
mandate of the Chapter 9 bodies, their enabling legislation, budgets,
reporting, levels of parliamentary oversight, public participation and
involvement, as well as the appointments in terms of the office of
commissioners.

As for the delay in the report, as members clearly can see, is not the type
of report that one can pass in a committee, put in the ATCs and pass in the
House the next day, simply because of the far-reaching implications and
also because some of the recommendations require very long-term
interventions, possibly legislative amendments, changes to budgets and
reporting and possibly even constitutional amendments.

One of the problems that we identified is that there seems to be a lack of
co-ordination, that the various Chapter 9s report to different portfolio
committees, and for that reason we tried to come up with creative ways in
which to solve this problem. We therefore thought to put in place a unit in
the office of the Speaker as a central point to co-ordinate all the various
functions and operations of the Chapter 9 committees.

This will enable Parliament to act proactively. For example, just to alert
the House that next year in September, the terms of office of all the
remaining commissioners on the Human Rights Commission will be expiring. We
don’t want to leave the Human Rights Commission in a situation where it
cannot function because the appointments have not been made timeously. So
what the Unit in the office of the Speaker will do is it will put
Parliament in a position to act proactively and to make the appointments
timeously. We also believe that it will strengthen parliamentary oversight.

Just to respond to the hon Smuts on what she said about the attitude of
Parliament: Parliament goes out of its way to strengthen the Chapter 9
Institutions and to assist and protect their independence and their
dignity. For example, the House will recall that not too long ago when
there were operational problems in the office of the Public Protector, this
House established a special ad hoc committee to assist the Public Protector
to sort out those problems. We then reconvened six months later to check on
its progress.

With regard to the justice committee, we have taken up the issue about the
Human Rights Commission Act. The Department of Justice has prepared a draft
Bill that they will put to the justice committee.

I would like to thank Prof Asmal in absentia, members of the committee who
worked extremely hard and also our support staff. Let us as Parliament
remember that the Constitution in section 181 enjoins all of us to support,
protect and strengthen the independence, dignity and effectiveness of all
our Chapter 9s, and let us continue to do so. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

   That the House —

     1) appreciates the extensive work done by the Ad Hoc Committee on
        Review of Chapter 9 and Associated Institutions in the execution of
        its mandate;


     2) recognises that a number of the recommendations contained in the
        Report will have far-reaching implications for Chapter 9 and
        Associated Institutions;

     3) notes that the Ad Hoc Committee, among others, recommends the
        establishment of a properly resourced Unit to co-ordinate all
        interactions between the National Assembly and state institutions
        strengthening democracy;


     4) adopts the recommendation in the Report pertaining to the
        establishment of the Unit on Constitutional Institutions and other
        Statutory Bodies;


     5) urges speedy establishment of the Unit on Constitutional
        Institutions and other Statutory Bodies and recommends that its
        location, structure and mandate be determined by the Speaker,
        having given due consideration to the National Assembly’s
        constitutional obligations with regard to Chapter 9 institutions,
        associated bodies and other statutory bodies;


     6) urges further that consideration be given to the implementation of
        the recommendation in the Report pertaining to budgets of the
        bodies reviewed being contained in a separate programme in
        Parliament’s budget vote, as envisaged by the Ad Hoc Committee; and


     7) resolves that the rest of the Report be held in abeyance with a
        view to allowing the Fourth Parliament to consider it in a manner
        it deems appropriate.

Motion agreed to.

  AMENDING DRAFT NOTICE AND SCHEDULE DETERMINING THE RATE AT WHICH SALARIES
 ARE PAYABLE TO CONSTITUTIONAL COURT JUDGES AND JUDGES ANNUALLY WITH EFFECT
                              FROM 1 APRIL 2008

            (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament)

There was no debate.

Amending Draft Notice and Schedule determining the rate at which salaries
are payable to Constitutional Court Judges and Judges annually, with effect
from 1 April 2008, approved.

                      CRIMINAL PROCEDURE AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.


Motion agreed to.


Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.


    INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATIONS AND PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION-RELATED
                         INFORMATION AMENDMENT BILL

                          (Consideration of Report)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I move:


  That the Report be adopted.


Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATIONS AND PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION-
                     RELATED INFORMATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY: Chair, I move:

  That the Bill, as amended, be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

                   NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Chairperson, in 1996,
implementing the injunctions of the RDP, the government adopted the
National Youth Commission Act. This was a first in the history of this
country and it established an institutional mechanism to address the
socioeconomic aspirations of young people.

Of course, in acting in this way, government was determining that it should
intervene immediately to reverse the socioeconomic marginalisation the
youth suffered under apartheid and involve them in the processes of
democratic transformation.

Basing itself on this understanding, the ANC considered youth development
and youth mobilisation to be vital to the processes of fundamental social
transformation in South Africa.  To address the specific challenges faced
by the youth was central to addressing the broader needs of the masses of
the people, because the youth had fought for freedom as a central component
part of these masses and not as an isolated or parallel sector.

You could not say to the youth that their aspirations would be addressed in
the broader process of addressing the general needs of the general public
without a targeted approach to what was a serious specific challenge.

Thus, youth development refers to the programme both to redress the grave
effects of apartheid on the black youth in particular, and to empower the
youth with the capacity fully and ably to participate in both society and
the economy.

This is so because unless this is done, the youth will remain marginalised.
Accordingly, Chapter 3 of the RDP said that youth development must
generally focus more on education and training, job creation and enabling
young people to realise their full potential and participate fully in the
society and their future.

It must restore the hope of our youth in the future and in their capacity
to channel their resourcefulness and energy into reconstruction and
development. The RDP further noted that the high levels of youth
unemployment require special programmes, and consequently directed that a
National Youth Service Programme be established, and that such a programme
be regarded not merely as a job creation measure but as youth development
and capacity-building.
To facilitate the establishment and implementation of this programme, the
RDP then directed that a national institution must co-ordinate the
programme in consultation with other sectors, and went on to say and, I
quote:


    Appropriate government departments must more fully represent youth
    interests including through the allocation of resources to organisations
    involved in youth work.


    An autonomous youth council should be given support in co-ordinating
    youth activities lobbying for the rights of our people and representing
    South Africa internationally. A review of legislation affecting youth
    and the implementation of youth service programmes must also be carried
    out.


What we are doing today in this House is to give effect to the injunctions
of the RDP empowered by the experience of the past 12 years since the
establishment of the National Youth Commission and 10 years since the
Minister of Finance announced the intention to establish the Umsobomvu
Youth Fund.

The truth is that during the past 12 years, we have tried to implement the
letter of the RDP in its spirit to establish the legislation for the
implementation of the Youth Development Programme, adopt the National Youth
Policy, establish the National Youth Commission, adopt the National Youth
Service Programme and establish an interdepartmental committee to ensure co-
ordination between appropriate government departments so that they more
strongly represent youth interests and strive for co-ordination between
government and nongovernmental organisations to enhance youth development
efforts better. What we are doing today is to review that experience, to
improve the capacity we have, to pursue the ideals of the RDP and of youth
development.

The National Youth Development Agency is an attempt to address the
disjuncture that existed between the National Youth Commission, as a policy-
making structure without implementing powers or capacity, and hence a
limited budget, and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund as an implementing structure,
albeit without a policy mandate.

This meant that we had a commission that could only think but had no
capacity or mandate to implement its own thoughts, while the fund had to
implement ideas conceived elsewhere.

The problem was that while the commission had the mandate spelt out in the
commission, the fund had no similar mandate and had to make up its mandate
as it went about its business.

Naturally, in this instance, because the two structures were independent of
each other and had different political principles, mandates and programmes,
whilst their field of work - youth development - was the same, there were
unavoidable, unnecessary tensions and duplications. The National Youth
Development Agency will, therefore, seek to address this problem. But we
must avoid the danger of regarding it as a panacea for all the problems
faced by the youth.

A perfect model for the implementation of youth development has not yet
been achieved. Even the National Youth Development Agency itself, as we are
establishing it today, would still again need to be remodelled in future to
meet new challenges, learning from the experiences it will accumulate as it
goes about its business.

Accordingly, and as part of its immediate responsibilities, it must
implement an integrated youth development strategy. In broad terms, the
National Youth Development Agency should exist for the purposes of
implementing and investing in youth development programmes that promote
participation in the formal labour market, entrepreneurship, human capital
development, and access to information by young people through streamlined
and targeted youth information programmes.

It must further support research and capacity-building projects. The
establishment of the agency should be viewed as the inevitable revolution
of youth development institutions in South Africa post 1994. Its
establishment heralds a new era for youth development. It will continue to
do the work of the previous institution in a
co-ordinated and more integrated way.

Its structure provides for a better governance and management structure
than the former institutions, enhancing the possibilities for planning
monitoring and evaluation.

Finally, as we establish the National Youth Development Agency, we should
commend the National Youth Commission and Umsobomvu Youth Fund for the work
they did and the millions of lives on which they impacted.

We should thank those structures for the genuine attempts they made to
implement an important and difficult mandate without any models to learn
from. But it is time for us to move on and learn from that experience and
establish a better institution. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M JOHNSON: Chairperson, Ministers present, Deputy Ministers, hon
members, comrades and friends, driven by what one of the revolutionaries of
our time, Chè Guevara, offered us -

  ... a great sense of duty, a sense of duty towards a society we are
  building, towards our fellow human beings and towards all the people
  around the world.

Young men and women of this country joined the South African struggles for
freedom and democracy.

Political struggles culminated in the 1994 democratic breakthrough, which
marked the end of the system of apartheid colonialism. It was a historical
breakthrough that ushered in an important epoch in the history of the
majority of South African youth, in which youth development would become
central to the developmental agenda of our state. Because of both the
contributions the young people of our country made in bringing about
freedom and democracy, and the challenges that continue to face them, we
cannot watch and do nothing when these young heroes and heroines of our
land require intervention from Parliament to further advance the struggles
of young people.

It was both the socioeconomic challenges facing young people and the
weaknesses within the existing institutions of youth development that
necessitated the intervention of our democratic parliament. This is the
context within which we should understand the resolution of Parliament on
23 September to establish a committee to process legislation to establish
the National Youth Development Agency, which is the subject of our debate
today.

Following this resolution of the House, our committee was established and
in turn it constituted a technical team to assist it in drafting this
legislation establishing the National Youth Development Agency. Indeed,
this team helped this committee to consolidate ideas and the views of the
committee members in developing draft legislation, which was later
published for public comment and submissions.

Before the actual public hearings, this committee, through its chairperson,
formally and informally consulted with those who are directly affected by
this process. These included institutions such as the Umsobomvu Youth Fund;
the National Youth Commission; the Minister in the Presidency, Dr Manto
Tshabalala-Msimang; and the Minister of Labour, hon Sheperd Mdladlana.

As for matters that will assist the committee in processing the
legislation, while much may be said about initial misgivings that engulfed
these consultations, they appear to have generated some results which, to
an extent, have assisted the committee to understand the complex issues.

Subsequently, this committee consulted with various youth formations
representing young people from across the country, which had converged in
Birchwood, Johannesburg to attend a youth dialogue convened by the National
Youth Commission on institutional arrangements for youth development in
South Africa. The complex issues arising from this legislation also require
us to consult with Nedlac. I must say that we have consulted Nedlac as
well.

Following on our presentation and discussions, Nedlac never objected to the
processing and even the finalisation of this legislation; instead it raised
issues that it wanted to be addressed in the legislation. I must also
mention that such issues are indeed taken care of in this Bill. In addition
to written submissions on this legislation, our committee allowed various
youth formations and individual young people - I repeat, individual - from
all over the country to make oral representations during the public
hearings.

In fact, the written and oral submissions received from youth commissions
and individual young people from other organisations that deal with issues
of young people, helped us in developing this legislation. Without fear of
contradicting myself, let me say that in processing this legislation, our
committee has taken into account many of the issues, concerns and proposals
raised during the public hearings on this legislation. The committee has
indeed consulted extensively on this legislation.

We developed this legislation we are debating today fully aware that young
people require space, opportunity and support to maximise their collective
and individual capacities, skills and abilities to develop themselves and
society as a whole.

Understanding the challenges created by unintegrated institutional
mechanisms for youth development, we now establish a new mechanism intended
–

  ... to ensure seamless integration, sustainability and responsiveness to
  the demands and aspirations of young people in this country.

The new mechanism I am referring to is the National Youth Development
Agency, which will exist as a unitary public entity. Such a public entity
will ensure that youth development becomes central in the country’s
development agenda. The agency will promote a uniform approach by organs of
state, the private sector and nongovernmental organisations on youth
development. It will initiate, design, co-ordinate and monitor all
government programmes aimed at integrating youth into the economy and
society in general. In particular, it will also help to develop an
integrated youth development strategy and guidelines for the implementation
of a national youth policy. Moreover, the legislation also empowers the
agency to implement programmes aimed at developing the young people of this
country.

However, critically important is that the agency needs to have the
organisational, human and financial capacity to lead and guide youth
development, especially internal capacity to implement, monitor and
evaluate implementation on policy and programmes of youth development.

We understand that change creates uncertainties, fears and anxiety. It can
never be an intention of Parliament to depress young people who are
dedicated in these institutions to promote youth development in our
country.

We therefore urge all of these young people, the young men and women
working in these institutions and offices, which are directly affected by
this process, to redouble their efforts in responding to the demands and
aspirations of young people. They have contracts that are guiding them and
they have benchmarks that they need to fulfil. They have nothing to fear,
instead they have to continue working, knowing that we have included in the
legislation provisions that protect the staff working in these institutions
and offices.

In conclusion, let me say that the youth remain a cornerstone of our
democracy. The future of this country depends on their willingness and
participation. The youth remain central in transforming our society to
improve the lives of our people, especially the poor and marginalised
sections.

However, the youth must understand their duty to participate actively in
the political, social and economic life of our country, to combat
discrimination and racism and promote democratic values. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M M SWATHE: The DA welcomes the National Youth Development Agency Bill.
The Bill provides for the establishment of the National Youth Development
Agency, aimed at creating and promoting co–ordination in youth development
matters. It provides for the objects and functions of the Agency; the
manner in which it is to be managed and governed; the regulation of its
staff matters and financial affairs; the administration of the fund, by the
Agency, under a new name referred to in the Demutualisation Levy Act of
1998; repeal of the National Youth Commission Act of 1996; and provides for
matters connected therewith.

The Bill sincerely addresses concerns of the youth by collapsing both those
thorny bodies, the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and National Youth Commission.
These two entities failed to implement and monitor youth development
mandates. The spirit of the National Youth Development Agency Bill, if
correctly implemented, will relieve ailing, unemployed, unskilled and poor
youth from their sufferings. The youth will enjoy all the benefits directed
at them through the development programmes initiated, such as the National
Youth Policy and the Integrated Youth Development Strategy.

The DA, however, warns the ruling party not to abuse this National Youth
Development Agency Bill by employing its members and ignoring youth from
all walks of life. We say this, as the DA, having experienced the failure
of Umsobomvu and the National Youth Commission, where positions were given
according to political affiliation. The Bill emphasises merit rather than
political connection.

The spirit and form of the Bill promise to resonate with youth development.
It raises the hopes of all young South Africans who lost hope in government
and its programmes. The objects of the Agency emphasise an open-opportunity
society. It revives South Africa’s dreams of unity in diversity, democracy,
new beginnings, hope and the rainbow nation. The Bill gives equal
opportunities to all youth based on capabilities and relevant
qualifications.

We support this Bill based on its liberal principles of clean governance,
equality before the law and the open-opportunity society for all youth
irrespective of race. The Bill encourages youth to work hard, study and
pursue their dreams with the support it provides.

Re le ba DA, re rata go bona diphetogo. Re rata go bona Lekalatirelo la
Setšhaba la Tlhabollo ya Bašwa le dira tše di latelago: le šomela baswa; le
eba lentšu la baswa; le tšwela baswa ba dinagamagae mohola; le fihlelela
baswa kamoka; gape le le kgauswi le baswa.

Re ile ra tshwenyega ka fao Tšhelete ya Umsobomvu ya Baswa le Khomišene ya
Setšhaba ya Baswa di bego di šoma ka gona. Re le ba DA, re bone diphošo tše
ntši go mekgatlo ye mebedi ye. Bjale re re go lekane. Re leboga go fedišwa
ga Tšhelete ya Umsobomvu ya Baswa le Khomišene ya Setšhaba ya Baswa. Re
amogela Lekalatirelo la Setšhaba la Tlhabollo ya Baswa leo re nago le
kholofelo ya gore le tla fediša matshwenyego le dillo tša baswa. Re le ba
DA, re kgopela gore Lekalatirelo la Setšhaba la Tlhabollo ya Baswa le tliše
diphetogo go baswa ba Afrika-Borwa. Ke baswa ba Afrika-Borwa bao ba tlago
kgona go tsebiša Lekalatirelo la Setšhaba la Tlhabollo ya Baswa ka mafokodi
a lona gore le kgone go lokiša diphošo tša lona.

Rena ba DA re re Lekalatirelo la Setšhaba la Tlhabollo ya Baswa le swanetše
go akaretša baswa ba mekgatlo kamoka ya dipolotiki, e sego mokgatlo wo o
bušago fela. Re le ba DA, re re Lekalatirelo la Setšhaba la Tlhabollo ya
Baswa le swanetše go ba lentšu la baswa kamoka ba Afrika-Borwa. [Tseno
ganong.] Re thekga molao wo. Re a leboga. [Legoswi.] [Nako e fedile.]
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[As the DA, we want to see changes. We want to see the National Youth
Development Agency doing the following: working for the youth; becoming the
voice of the youth; benefiting youth from rural areas; being accessible to
all the youth.

We were dissatisfied with the manner in which the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and
the National Youth Commission operated. As the DA, we witnessed a lot of
mistakes being made by these two associations. We now say it is enough. We
are thankful that the National Youth Commission has been cancelled. We
welcome the National Youth Development Agency, which we believe will bring
about changes to the lives of the youth of South Africa. It is the youth of
South Africa who will be able to inform the National Youth Development
Agency of their problems in order to resolve those.

As the DA, we are saying that the National Youth Development Agency must
cater for the youth from all political parties and not only for those from
the ruling party. As the DA we are saying that the National Youth
Development Agency must be the voice of all the youth in South Africa.
[Interjections.] We support this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.] [Time
expired.]]

Ms S P LEBENYA (IFP): Chairperson, hon members, as a member of the Ad hoc
Committee on the National Youth Development Agency, the IFP had the
opportunity not only to make an input but to listen to a plethora of
vigorous inputs from South African youth at the public hearings held on
Monday and Tuesday.

It is very clear that despite the ongoing youth crisis, a huge segment of
our youth is extremely passionate and ready to get involved in issues of
youth and economic development in general. I must say, it is unfortunate
that the ad hoc committee presiding on this Bill was unable to afford civil
society sufficient participation as well as to integrate some of the
critical concerns arising from the civil society submissions.

Almost all submissions from youth activists and organisations reflected a
kind of institution that would go beyond just merging the National Youth
Commission and Umsobomvu Youth Fund, that would give fresh impetus to youth
development and above all, its implementation. The word “implement” was the
youth catch phrase as everyone is weary of the failures of the National
Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund.

Many of our young people are growing up along those roads, between
multicoloured houses, in shacks and other vulnerable situations. Therefore,
they demanded a well-formulated implementing institution rather than a mere
co-ordination agency.

Our own youth in the IFP has been calling for a full-fledged youth ministry
to implement youth development and take responsibility for all affairs.
Regrettably, instead of outlining how the agency will unfold at provincial
and local levels, the final draft of the Bill has totally removed any
provisions relating to provinces.

The IFP believes the success of this legislation will depend on how the new
agency relates to young people and how the entire government responds to
the current economic crisis and gross socioeconomic inequalities in the
country as a whole.

Taking note of the above concerns, the IFP recommends this Bill for
approval. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, hon members, the National Youth Development
Agency Bill seeks to create an apparently new structure to deal with the
important question of youth and how their development is catered for within
the greater context of government policy and administration.

Important issues that require attention include how national policies and
decisions reflect the needs and inspirations of the youth. It is especially
important that we create a democratic society that has legitimacy among the
new generation if we expect them to carry forward the historic project of
consolidating the freedom we attained in 1994.

Our concern lies not so much in the objectives of the Bill, but we are
concerned that it merely seems to duplicate an existing structure that
exists within the Presidency, and to collapse the Umsobomvu Youth Fund into
this new structure.

It must be noted that both the commission and the fund have poor delivery
track records and dubious fiscal management histories. However, these
problems will not disappear with the establishment of this new structure.
This is because these structures are transferred as they are into the new
agency. The agency will inherit all the problems and weaknesses ...

The UDM supports the Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, as a new democracy, we have been greatly
challenged by our history and aims to institute policies that can inculcate
in communities equal opportunity, freedom and unity. However, the realities
of poverty create great imbalances throughout the nation and among our
people.

It is as though in South Africa it is the drive to attain the best
democracy that keeps us going. We as a nation, however, are the architects
of tomorrow. It is our duty to steer the youth of today away from these
challenges and support them in being great leaders, developers and
organisers of the generation to follow them. Mahatma Gandhi once said: “A
country that does not invest in its youth does not have a future.”

The MF applauds the introduction of the National Youth Agency Bill that
will certainly assist us in addressing the challenges that we face with our
youth today and enable them with the tools to cope with tomorrow. The MF is
confident that this board shall deliver greatness to our youth. The MF will
support the Bill.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): While they are preparing I am going
to ask the Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party to recommend a hat for
the hon Bloem! [Laughter.]

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Chairperson, the youth of today are our future
and tomorrow’s leaders; and yet studies show that 70% of our country’s
youth population remains unemployed.

In 1994, after our democratic breakthrough, a period of youth development
became part of the developmental intervention of the democratic state. We
saw the development of youth-focused policy and legislative frameworks. In
1996 the National Youth Commission Act saw the establishment of the
National Youth Commission.

In 2001 government showed its commitment to development by establishing the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund, through section 3 of the Demutualisation Levy Act,
Act 50 of 1998. Money was put into this fund to fast-track mainstreaming
youth economic participation in the country.

The mandate of the NYC was the establishment of a statutory body charged
with formulating a national youth policy, co-ordinating the implementation
of such a policy and lobbying and advocating for youth development in the
country.

The mandate of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund states that the fund is established
in accordance with such terms and conditions as the Minister of Finance may
determine to fund national projects for skills development and job
creation.

Unfortunately, there were weaknesses and limitations experienced by the NYC
because of its limited mandate and the fact that it had no enforcing
powers. The hon member from the IFP mentioned in her presentation that
there were many failures from the NYC, and these were not failures on their
part, but because of the limitations regarding the mandate within the Act.
That was the reason for the limitations - because of the law.

The Umsobomvu Fund lacks a legal mandate for this fund to be regulated and
therefore it regulated itself. The two institutions also literally ran
parallel programmes and were at times duplicating each other’s mandate, yet
they did not interact with each other or conduct joint planning sessions.

The youth convention and the ANC Polokwane conference renewed calls for a
new agency to be set up. The Ad Hoc Committee on the National Youth
Development Agency Bill had just completed its task in working on this Bill
this week. Thirty-two written submissions were sent to the committee; 21
presentations only were made to the committee and many of them came from
different youth formations as well as provincial youth commissions; and
four individuals also made submissions.

The reasons for the submissions were for the ad hoc committee to hear the
views of different youth formations and different individuals on the draft
Bill. This Bill arose from the need to merge the two institutions, namely
the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund.

The idea of the National Youth Development Agency will ensure seamless
integration, sustainability and responsiveness to the demands and
aspirations of South African youth.

The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons oversees the work of both these
agencies.

Concerns have been raised in the committee and brought forward to the
committee, and these concerns were that the programmes of both the NYC and
the UYF were not inclusive. They were not representative of all the youth
of South Africa, especially youth with disabilities and the rural youth.
There has not been enough public awareness about the work of the NYC and
the UYF. This was evident when we as the JMC performed oversight work.

During the public hearings we noted that most of those presenting to the ad
hoc committee agreed that a merging of the NYC and the UYF was needed. They
were happy to support a new agency.

In the Bill, the objects of the agency are that they are to develop an
integrated youth development plan and strategies for South Africa. They are
to develop guidelines for implementation of youth development as well as
initiate, design, and co-ordinate, evaluate and monitor all programmes
aimed at integrating the youth into the economy and society of our country.

The agency will guide efforts and facilitate economic participation and
empowerment, and achievement of education and training. It has to partner
and assist organs of state, the private sector, the NGOs and community-
based organisations on initiatives directed at attaining employment and
skills development.

It will initiate programmes directed at poverty alleviation, urban and
rural development and combating of crime, substance abuse and social decay
amongst youth. It has to establish annual national priority programmes in
respect of youth development and promote a uniform approach by all organs
of state, the private sector and nongovernmental organisations to matters
relating to or involving youth development. It must endeavour to promote
the interests generally of the youth, particularly young people with
disabilities.

In order for the agency to achieve these objectives, it will establish
competencies and capabilities in its operations, including the following:
It will be responsible for the national youth service and social cohesion,
economic participation, policy, research and development, governance,
training and development, youth advisory and information services and the
national youth fund.

There has also been a concern and talk that the merger will cause staff
members to lose their jobs and end contracts. The Bill specifically says in
clause 21 that following section 197 of the Labour Relations Act, staff of
the NYC and the UYF will be transferred to the agency. This should prevent
any panic that might occur.

Committee members and those presenting their submissions were concerned
that service delivery to the youth of South Africa, the national youth
policy and integrated national youth strategy be implemented so that our
youth can benefit.

Coming out of the presentations from the two institutions to the JMC it has
been noted that there are government departments which do not take the
needs of the youth seriously.

As chairperson of this committee, and as a member of the ad hoc committee
that worked on this Bill, I hope that in its work this agency will take
into consideration the need to fast-track services to the youth.

If I do not have another opportunity from this podium, I would like to
thank the NYC and the UYF for all the work that they have done, in spite of
the limitations and challenges that they faced. I wish you all the best.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I would also like to
acknowledge the Deputy President of the ANC Youth League in the gallery. I
understand he is such a tough lobbyist that some hon members have requested
that he get a hat as a gift from the House!

I want also to thank all the hon members who participated in the
discussion. I also would like to recommend a hat for Mr Swathe and to
suggest to the hon Madikiza that he reads the Bill again because I don’t
think it says the things that he was saying here. He probably read the
wrong Bill. I would suggest to my former president there, Lulu Johnson,
that he gives him the correct copy.

The National Youth Development Agency will combine rather than split the
efforts of the previous structures. The weaknesses in the National Youth
Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund did not exist because of the
deliberate weaknesses in these organisations. It was because of the mandate
that these organisations had.

The merger will result in a better-resourced and better-capacitated agency
that will benefit from the collective experience of the two structures,
which were accumulated over a period of about 10 years, and from leveraging
the capacities of the two organisations towards a single goal.

Again the agency must not be regarded as a panacea to the problems of the
youth. The labour market must still create jobs. Schools must still teach
and offer good quality education. Universities must still develop skills
and produce rounded, competent citizens. The agency will have to play its
part in lobbying for youth development and in establishing some programmes
and implementing those that they can afford within the limitations of the
resources that they have.

In reality, the agency will not have all the resources it needs to be able
to respond at once to the complex problems that young people in our country
have. That would mean that all government departments, including the
private sector, will have to play their part and not shirk their
responsibilities simply because a national youth development agency already
exists.

This is a new era which we are going to enter in the field of youth
development. It was instructive that this agency was the idea of young
people themselves, and we should commend the youth for their vigilance and
for being alert and being able to voice the ideas and concerns they have
about weaknesses in the structures and programmes that we have established.
Thank you very much, and Merry Christmas to all. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

         MINERAL AND PETROLEUM RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

                    MINE HEALTH AND SAFETY AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


  That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

             NATIONAL RADIOACTIVE WASTE DISPOSAL INSTITUTE BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

         FIRST REPORT OF RULES COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, 2008

                          (Consideration of Report)
There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.
        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
   CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - MAGISTRATES’ COURTS: AMENDMENT OF RULES OF
      COURT AND AMENDMENT OF RULES REGULATING CONDUCT OF PROCEEDINGS OF
 PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL DIVISIONS OF HIGH COURT OF SOUTH AFRICA, IN ACCORDANCE
  WITH SECTION 7(C) OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE AMENDMENT ACT, 2003 (ACT NO 42 OF
                                    2003)

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
 CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - DRAFT RULES OF PROCEDURES FOR APPLICATIONS TO
 COURT IN TERMS OF THE PROMOTION OF ACCESS TO INFORMATION ACT, 2000 (ACT NO
                                 42 of 2000)

There was no debate.

Question put: That the Reports be adopted.

Agreed to.
Reports accordingly adopted.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION PARTY: Chairperson, we are entering the
season of peace and goodwill, and so this is the occasion for kind words of
thanks and holiday good wishes.

You will probably, therefore, be relieved to hear that I will not be using
this opportunity to refer to the fact that for the last five months of this
year, Parliament has been inhibited from playing its rightful role of
exercising oversight over the executive and bringing them to account by the
fact that Parliament has hardly met.

I will also not use this opportunity to refer to the fact that the
President has only appeared twice to answer oral questions, the Deputy
President once and three government clusters only once. Neither will I be
referring to the fact that the Scorpions Bills and Broadcasting Amendments
Bills which were passed by Parliament were a blot on this Parliament’s
copybook.

Nor even will I mention the fact that the integrity of this institution was
further called into question by the termination of the mandate of the
liquidators in the Travelgate matter and the purchase of the outstanding
debt by Parliament.

I am not going to refer to any of these matters because this is the
beginning of the season of peace and goodwill – and I do not want to pick a
fight with the hon members on the opposite side of this House on this the
last day of the session.

It’s in this spirit that I formally, from this podium, congratulate the new
Chief and Deputy Whips of the Majority Party. I wish them peace in the New
Year. I wish I could offer them prosperity as well, but the Moseneke
Commission had other thoughts.

I do promise not to be extra difficult in respect of my dealing with the
Chief Whip as I am hugely concerned that since my becoming Chief Whip of
the DA, I have literally seen off two Chief Whips and one Acting Chief Whip
of the ANC. I don’t know why I have this effect on people. But it must be
either me or possibly all the turmoil that is in the ranks of the majority
party. Now, who knows what’s going to happen in the New Year? I promise the
new Chief Whip that I will do my best to co-operate.

Nonetheless, let me thank them for the good working relationship we have
had while they were in the Office of the Chief Whip and wish them well. I
have to say that when one looks at the two Chief Whips and one Acting Chief
Whip, one left as a result of being in disgrace, one was demoted and one
was promoted - so there you are!

I don’t want to speculate about the fact that the Hon Baleka Mbete also
left her post during the course of this year.  She has now become the
Deputy President and I am sure it is only because of my very good working
relationship with her that she has achieved such high office. We wish her
well too.

To the new Speaker, may I congratulate her and wish her long life, long
life, not only in her life but in her post as well, because I don’t know
how long she will be there for.

The Christmas season is about giving and receiving presents. And when I
look around the Chamber at this time in our political history, and more
particularly, with an election looming, it reminds me of a family around a
Christmas tree on Christmas morning – full of excitement and anticipation.
As always, when Father Christmas delivers the presents some get more than
they anticipate, others are disappointed - sometimes there are even tears.

The bigger brother is anticipating that because, being the oldest, he had
in the past received a big present, he will once again receive a big
present. What he doesn’t realise is that others in the family are now
growing up and getting bigger – so I am afraid he will be disappointed.
Even more so, because I don’t think he’s quite realised yet that there is a
new baby in the house. I hope there won’t be too much disappointment for
their side and I certainly hope there won’t be tears.
I wish I could advise the older child to write urgently to Father Christmas
to request him to deliver a bigger present, but I am a little afraid that
Father Christmas might just ask why he should deliver a bigger present when
the older brother himself has failed to deliver very much over the last 14
years.

But perhaps this Christmas allegory is a bit too complicated for the end of
the session. Perhaps let me just take this opportunity to first of all
thank all the DA officials, research staff, my own personal assistant, PA,
and the DA Whips who helped me, and indeed all the Whips of all parties who
co-operated so well in the interests of Parliament.

Let me also thank the Presiding Officers and all the staff of Parliament,
from the most senior to the most junior, for doing their best to treat us
with courtesy and consideration and for giving of their best.

Finally, then, may I take this opportunity to wish the Presiding Officers,
all the hon members and all the staff a happy and blessed Christmas and a
very good New Year. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I want to say that Mr Davidson has done
all the beautiful thank-yous and I don’t want to repeat them, except to say
that we join with him in expressing all those thank-yous and words of
appreciation to everybody.
Therefore, what we should do today is to acknowledge that in the past year
this Parliament has performed according to international parliamentary
standards. [Applause.] And we can all be proud of this Parliament. We did
have a number of exceptions to that rule, like the hon Mr Ellis, who I have
heard is becoming an ambassador.
Fortunately, he is leaving us. I believe he will be South Africa’s
ambassador at Robben Island. We have several senior positions changing in
Parliament. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, on a point of order, sir. The hon Van der Merwe
will know the strict rule that when a person is appointed as an ambassador
it is not allowed to be made public until such time as the President signs
it. The President hasn’t yet signed my certificate. So, Mr Van der Merwe is
totally out of order!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I am just wondering how we knew it,
you see. [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I have this information from the Presidency and I
know that ... [Interjections.]

I went to the President and discussed the appointment of Mr Ellis and he
asked me where we should send him. I firstly thought to Gough Island and
then Robben Island, and the President has signed it. So, goodbye, Mike.
[Laughter.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, the last time Mr Van der Merwe gave us a cake
was when he couldn’t see the President. I wonder if he would be so kind as
to send us a cake again now that he has seen the President. [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I have specially taken a big, beautiful
cake to the new Speaker. Both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker ate that
cake in the Speaker’s office and I am sorry that you didn’t even get a
crumb of it.

There have been a number of changes. I want to agree with Mr Davidson and
congratulate the new Chief Whip and the Deputy Chief Whip, but also I want
to pay special tribute to the former Speaker, now Deputy President, Baleka
Mbete. Over many years as Deputy Speaker and then as Speaker, she was a big
and shining diamond in our parliamentary crown. Thank you, Madam Deputy
President, we are proud of you. [Applause.]

To Mr Andries Nel, who is now a presiding officer, congratulations on your
well deserved promotion, Andries. [Applause.]

To the new Speaker, Madam Gwen, thank you very much for being the Speaker
not only of one political party but of all members of Parliament.
[Applause.]

Today is a very special day. It is the last sitting day of the year 2008.
It is therefore not a day to criticise, although there might be room for
criticism. I am not going to say this, and then, like Mr Davidson, take a
few stabs - stabbing below the belt.

We are at the end of yet another year of service to the people of South
Africa. I am sure we are all tired and looking forward to a well-deserved
rest. And I am sure everyone has done his best including Dr Gawie, the CI
governor; you have also worked hard.

Let us therefore pause for a moment on this last sitting day, and let us
rather concentrate on fellowship, friendship and goodwill today. Let us
today express good wishes, such as that we will all enjoy a well-deserved
break as from today; that we will all enjoy a wonderful Christmas with our
families; and that the Lord will bring us all back next year to resume our
service to the people of our beloved land.

In conclusion, I wish to make a very sincere appeal to all members. After
all, we are all colleagues no matter to which party we belong. My sincere
appeal is about next year’s very important general election. My concern is
that there are unfortunately already ominous signs of a very turbulent time
ahead.

Therefore, let us all take a specific New Year’s resolution; namely, that
we will conduct that election in a spirit of ubuntu. [Applause.]

Let us therefore refrain from personal attacks and insults and emotional
electioneering. Let us, as members of Parliament and leaders, motivate and
impress upon our party supporters to keep cool and ensure a peaceful
election. Let us resolve to fight those elections in a manner that will
demonstrate to the outside world, and in particular Africa and Zimbabwe,
that South Africa has truly became a democratic country in which we respect
one another and in which we respect and uphold the values of our
Constitution. Let these be our sincere New Year’s resolutions. Go well and
may God protect you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, may I ask the hon Mr Van der Merwe a question?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Chairperson, I still have a few seconds left and
as it is a very simple question that is normally put by this member I will
take. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: It is a very simple question. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): In the first place you have no
seconds left, but you may take the question. [Laughter.]
Mr M J ELLIS:  Chairperson, Mr Van der Merwe is quite right, it is a very
simple question. Shouldn’t we be using this opportunity, Mr Van der Merwe,
to say goodbye to you once and for all, or do you intend coming back again?
[Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE:  Chairperson, I wish once again to announce my
retirement. I will retire on the day that I die. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, hon members, first let me join my colleagues
in congratulating our colleagues on their new appointments, which they
deserve. The end of another year has arrived, perhaps more rapidly than
expected because of the many dramatic political and legislative
developments that we have experienced.

This year Parliament has succeeded in processing a significantly larger
portion of legislation than previously. However, it has come at a price in
terms of quality, because I fear that there has been an unseemly rush to
process Bills that will later be open to legal challenges and require
amendment or redrafting.

Another aspect of this legislative year that we need to take note of is
that this year this House has been used by the ruling party to pursue
dubious and ill-conceived political objectives by way of legislation.
Two particular examples of this occurrence spring to mind: firstly, the
disbandment of the Scorpions and secondly, the legislative intervention to
remove the SABC Board.

We should probably bid farewell to many of our colleagues in the ruling
party benches because one suspects that by early next year they will have
resigned in order to pursue their politics under other auspices.

On this note, I want to appeal to all the hon members that we should
recognise the need for mature and responsible political contest. It is our
duty to ensure that our election campaigns do not degenerate into infantile
name-calling, hate speech and the incitement of violence.

At this time of the year, three other important matters require mentioning.
While we are in our constituencies we need to help spread the message.
Firstly, on 1 December it is Aids Day. It is an opportunity to further
raise awareness about the pandemic.

Secondly, the 16 days of activism campaign for no violence against women
and children will be underway and again as leaders in our communities, we
can help spread this important message. Finally, the holiday is a time for
family relaxation but also a time when a large number of South Africans die
on our roads. Let us practise and preach road safety, wherever we go. [Time
expired.]
Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, colleagues, between now and when we reconvene in
February, I know there will be very little rest for most of us as we go
into our constituencies and focus on party work in preparation for the 2009
national and provincial elections.

The Christmas season, however, is an important time of celebration for
Christians as it marks the birth of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. The
ACDP wishes all members of Parliament, officials, staff of Parliament and
the people of South Africa a wonderful Christmas and a peaceful and
prosperous 2009.

This year has been an unusually interesting year in politics as events have
taken some abrupt twists and turns, resulting in an exhilarating shaking up
of democracy. Suddenly people are daring to hope that there is more to
democracy than this thing we have experienced for the most part of the past
15 years.

I am reminded of the words by James Bovard - and you need to visualise this
mental picture: “Democracy must be something more than two wolves and a
sheep voting on what to have for dinner.” [Laughter.]

Happy Christmas, travel safely and God bless you all.

Nk M M MDLALOSE: Ngiyabingelela sibonge ukuqeda unyaka, obewunyaka noko
obungelula, omude kuneminingi, obunezinkinga kanye nezimangaliso.
Ngiyabonga kodwa ukufika kuleli thuba. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Greetings to you all, and we are grateful for ending the year; a year that
was not easy at all, that was longer than the rest, and which had problems
and surprises. But I am grateful to reach this stage.]

May I also indulge your patience. Let us close our eyes and think of the
last Christmas we had. I want to take this House on a journey, a journey
into the time of lapho itshe lisancinzwa ngozipho [when a stone had to be
raised with fingernails.]

Think of green scenery, colourful flowers, the rain, the sun, the beaches
and the picnics. Do we remember when we had family, Christmas trees, the
singing, the concerts, the jokes, the love overflowing, the food, the house
calls and the spirit of sharing? Open your eyes.

As public representatives, may we revive that spirit in our constituencies,
although there are economic constraints.

Ukujabula akuvinjwa ubuphofu, ukujabula buhamba nokufisa umoya omnandi
nokwakha ubuhlobo obuqinile noma siqhutshwa ukuthi siyafuna ukusebenza
ngokwepolitiki ake sikusebenzele kodwa ukujabula kwesizwe nabantu bakithi.
Ake siwakhe umoya kakhisimuzi nomoya kaNcibijane omnandi. Khisimuzi omuhle
malunga. Ngiyabonga. Merry Christmas. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Happiness is not hindered by destitution; happiness is accompanied by a
good spirit and the building of a strong relationship. Even though we are
politically motivated, let us work to ensure the happiness of the nation
and our fellow people. Let us revive the good spirit of Christmas and New
Year. Merry Christmas, hon members. Thank you.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, time never ceases to amaze me. How fast this
year has passed and how fast have the past four years passed! It has been a
productive, eventful year and the MF applauds all who have contributed to
the effective running of both Houses in this national sphere of government.

I take this opportunity to thank our amazing Madam Speaker, Deputy Speaker,
not forgetting our former Speaker, who is now the Deputy President of our
country, and we are very proud of her. Furthermore, I extend thanks to the
NA table, the Secretary to Parliament, the Secretary of the NA and to all
Whips of all the political parties.

Committees have been hard at work fulfilling our parliamentary duties and
introducing legislation that best delivered to our democracy. We applaud
all committees and committee chairs for their hard work and dedication. We
certainly cannot leave the House without thanking all our support staff and
parliamentary staff who made our task so much easier. The service officers
deserve special thanks.

I would like to wish all a safe and happy festive season. May all be
surrounded by loved ones, laughter and great feasts. As we close the doors
for 2008, may 2009 bring us much success, prosperity and joy. I wish a very
Happy New Year to all. On 8 December Muslims will be celebrating Bakri Eid,
and I say Eid Mubarak to all our Muslim citizens. The MF wishes all
matriculants the best of luck and a prosperous future.

Lastly, we thank all our supporters and constituencies for their support
and trust in our leadership. I profess our gratitude to them and guarantee
them of our dedication and commitment.

Almighty God, I pray for Your guidance, blessing and care over South Africa
and all those who live in it. Many thanks and much love to all of you. I
thank you.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY: Hon Chairperson, I would like to
say, ...

... bengicela ukuthi ngithi kwiNkatha Freedom Party dudu akwehlanga
lungehlanga.[... condolences to the Inkatha Freedom Party.]

I am standing here before you today having filled the shoes that were
generally too big to be filled. The shoes were for some time worn by the
outgoing Chief Whip and Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party, hon
Mthethwa and hon Andries Nel, respectively.
Their guidance on how to tie the shoelaces made it possible for us to
assemble here today. To them I want to say: You have done a good job in the
Whippery. [Applause.]

On behalf of the ANC, I would like to thank all members of this House for
the good work done this year. I would like to thank the Table staff and the
Secretary to the NA for the excellent work that they have done. They really
go beyond the call of duty to assist in the smooth running of the House. I
thank the service officers, all the staff members of Parliament and the
staff of the various political parties for their assistance. We would like
to thank members of the media for covering our proceedings and debates. We
do not always agree with what they say, but we thank them for their work.

The ANC believes in the correctness of our policies, strategies and
tactics. However, in the same breath, we also believe in constructive
engagement which does not exclude criticism. The ANC believes that we learn
more from mistakes than from success because he who has never made a
mistake cannot make a discovery. This Parliament is an important body that
allows us to learn from one another. In the process we say things that
might hurt others. These things are not personal.

Let me highlight some of the important achievements of this Parliament
since 1994. This Parliament has been led by women Speakers in an excellent
manner. [Applause.] Leaders of various parties in this Parliament are
women. We have increased the number of women chairpersons and whips in this
Parliament since 1994.

The number of young people and people living with disabilities has
increased since 1994. After the general election the ANC will ensure that
50% of the ANC public representatives and members of the national
executives will be women. We are challenging all parties in this House, and
those who want to be elected to this House, to do the same or even more.

This House has passed very progressive legislation such as the money Bill,
the Child Justice Bill and many others that will change the course of
history forever. We have been part of the initiative of promoting peace and
democracy in Africa and in the rest of the world. These successes could
only be achieved because of the commitment of all of us to create a better
society.

The Freedom Charter declares that South Africa belongs to all who live in
it, black and white. No government can just claim authority unless it is
based on the will of the people. It is because of the will of the people
that we are here today. It is because of the will of the people that we are
the majority party.

It is because of the will of the people that there are minority parties,
and we respect their right to be here and we will defend to the death their
right to differ with us. We know that they will defend to the death our
right to articulate and defend our policies as the majority party. This
forces us into a healthy co-existence to build our democracy.

Let me take this opportunity to congratulate members of this House and
those who have been appointed in terms of section 193 of the Constitution,
who have been appointed to the Cabinet. We would also like to congratulate
the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker and all other members who were given
positions of responsibility during the term ending next year - and that
includes members of the opposition.

We differ ideologically, tactically and strategically, but we are not
enemies. We should not be enemies. [Applause.] We are just friends who see
a society which we want to create differently. Let us all campaign
vigorously but fairly. Our democracy is becoming stronger every day. As we
go into recess and the constituency period we will miss the jokes of hon
Van der Merwe and hon Dennis Bloem and of many others. [Applause.]

Our wish is that everybody would come back from the opposition parties
after the elections, but that is not possible because as the ANC we are
going to increase our majority. [Applause.] Unfortunately, that has
implications for some of us.

We wish you a Merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year. Do not drink and
drive. As we celebrate Christmas and the New Year, we must also remember
that there are those in our country, in Africa and in the rest of the
world, who go to bed without food. We must remember that there are those
who die of treatable diseases because they have no money to buy drugs.

There are those who are being killed in civil wars. Let us redouble our
efforts to build a caring nation. The contribution of each and every one of
us is a victory for humankind. Let us go and be soldiers to implement the
Freedom Charter. We part to meet and meet to part. Let us meet again and
let joy be our watchword. Hambani kahle, tot siens. Goodbye. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, please! When you speak about
enemies, we are not enemies. I remember this young person who was just
elected to Parliament for the first time touring the House of Commons. Then
he sits next to a stalwart who has been in Parliament for a long time.

Then he says to the stalwart, “It’s good now to sit here and watch your
enemies.” He points at the opposition. The old stalwart said, “No, you got
it wrong, my son.” He asks, “Why?” The old member answers. “That is the
opposition party, the enemies are here behind you!” [Applause.] [Laughter.]
I’m sure we all know that experience!

I am now going to read a message from the Speaker, who is not here. She
asked me to convey this message to you. I’m going to read it to you
unamended.

                          MESSAGE FROM THE SPEAKER

Human beings are by nature sentimental. We like to leave behind traces of
our sojourn here on earth. That is why we even go to the extent of creating
gadgets such as audio-recorders to record our voices and cameras to capture
and save our images for posterity.

As a space inhabited by people, Parliament is therefore affected by such
human behaviour. What is different, however, about recording specific
epochs of Parliament’s lifetime is that we are registering a tiny footprint
on a canvas of millions of years of civilisation.

But bear in mind that the small step we take and record in this regard is a
significant contribution to the story of mankind. Therefore, I’m honoured
that as I make my closing remarks of the proceedings of the National
Assembly for the year 2008, I would also be exercising the singular honour
and privilege of making reflection on the third Parliament as a whole.

Of course, we know that every institution has its lows and highs, but why
concentrate on the bad when millions of South Africans have mandated us
here to do only the good in creating a better life for all?

It is for this reason that I shall only give the highlights of the third
Parliament, as follows, from the previous to the current juncture: That is,
the successful implementation of a travel system for Members of Parliament
and their dependants, 2005-06; the establishment of the Parliamentary Group
on International Relations, the PGIR 2006; Parliament’s participation in
the African Peer Review Mechanism process, 2006; the review of Chapter 9
and associated institutions by the ad hoc committee of the National
Assembly, 2006-07; the setting up of parliamentary democracy offices in
three provinces in 2008; the adoption of a new governance model for
Parliament in 2007; the graduation of members from various learning
opportunities, including the passing of the French language course by two
members of this Parliament, that is hon J Fubbs and the hon C Johnson;
hosting sectoral parliaments: the People’s Assembly, Women’s Parliament and
Youth Parliament annually; the ten review publications celebrating
Parliament’s achievement and challenges since 1994, which were launched in
2007, that is the institutional memory; hosting the 118th Assembly of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union in April 2008; Parliament’s ongoing participation
in international parliamentary structures, including the Pan-African
Parliament and SADC PF; the adoption of a report on the legislative process
in Parliament by the Joint Task Team of the legislative process in
Parliament for consideration by the fourth Parliament; the adoption by the
Joint Rules Committee of the oversight and accountability model produced by
the task team on oversight and accountability in 2008; the adoption by both
Houses of Rules for the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, 2008; the
processing of legislation, three Bills, to end floor-crossing, 2008; the
processing of the Financial Administration of Parliament and Provincial
Legislatures Bill and the Financial Management Parliament Bill 2008; the
establishment of the Multi-Party Women’s Caucus.

I’m sure that these achievements and many others, which I had no time or
space to cite, will give us a spring in our step as we go home to celebrate
with our families and constituencies the objectives met and life well led
for the year 2008.

As you indulge in all sorts of goodies, spare not only a thought for many
South Africans who cannot afford a plate of bread at the end of the day,
but give generously where you can to bring a smile to the face of a hungry
child, for it is the plight of that child which got you here in this
Assembly. Lifting that child from what seems to be a curse would even be
more worthwhile than waiting for it to grow up first as a voter before you
can even want to consider talking to it.

Hon members, let me also take this opportunity to say a special word of
appreciation to officials of Parliament who are forever working hard to
ensure that we discharge our duties. I want to thank the Secretary to
Parliament, Mr Zingile Dingani, and his team, Mr Michael Coetzee, Mr Tango
Lamani, Secretary to the National Assembly, Mr Kamal Mansura, and his team,
all the divisional managers and the entire staff of Parliament and the
staff in the Speaker’s office.

On that note, I would like to wish you all a wonderful festive season and a
prosperous New Year.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Now that concludes the farewell
speeches and the business for this session. The House will now rise. I’m
sure you know that experience! [Applause.]

The House adjourned at 11:14.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
`
The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    1) Bills passed by National Assembly on 21 November 2008:
          a) Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 42D – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54D – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          c) National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B 41D –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          d) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill [B
             10F – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          e) Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
             Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B 9D – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) National Youth Development Agency Bill [B 82 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Report of the 2008 People’s Assembly.

CREDA INSERT - T081121e-insert1 – PAGE 2330

A.          BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION

1.    Background

The concept of the People’s Assembly may be found in the ideals contained
in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa that positions our
democracy as both representative and participatory. Accordingly, our system
of government is based on the principles of the people's representatives
whose responsibility is to act in the people's interest and the
participation of the people in the process of decision making and
broadening the range of people who have access to opportunities for such
participation.

The People’s Assembly, in pursuance of the ideals of the Constitution,
provides a vehicle that brings the people and their representatives
together to debate challenges facing them. It provides a voice for the
people to express themselves and to participate in seeking solutions to
their challenges.

The People’s Assembly is also a fitting response to a commitment to build
an effective People’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the
people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better quality of
life for all the people of South Africa.

To realise its commitment of being a Parliament that is responsive to the
needs of the People, Parliament has, since 2004, been coming together with
ordinary South Africans in the People’s Assemblies.

The People’s Assembly is a national event hosted by Parliament in one of
the provinces. Participants in the Peoples’ Assembly are drawn from
different provinces, the local municipality and members of Parliament and
converge at the national event in the hosting province to deliberate on
different topics.  The results of the deliberations are presented and
discussed in plenary where members of the Executive are invited to respond
to questions and comments.
The provincial legislatures, including the provincial legislature of the
province in which the People’s Assembly is hosted, hold parallel provincial
assemblies at the same time as the People’s Assembly. Participants at the
provincial assemblies join the People’s Assembly via satellite link and
participate in the discussions by making inputs and comments or by asking
questions.

2.    Introduction

This is the fifth People’s Assembly to be held by the Third Parliament. The
first People’s Assembly was held in Parliament in October 2004, and
celebrated the 10th anniversary of our democracy and the adoption of the
Constitution in 1996. The second People’s Assembly was held in Kliptown,
Soweto, in 2005 to mark the 50th anniversary of the Congress of the People
under the theme: “People’s Voices: Shaping the Future”. The third People’s
Assembly was held in 2006 in Oudtshoorn under the theme: “all shall have
equal rights” and provided an opportunity to review equality legislation
passed by Parliament.

The fourth People’s Assembly was held in 2007 at Mbizana, Eastern Cape
under the theme: “Masijule ngengxoxo Mzansi “.  The occasion was also used
to commemorate the life of O R Tambo by unveiling a plaque at his
birthplace, Nkantolo.

The 2008 People’s Assembly was held in Bushbuckridge, Mpumalanga Province.
Each province was represented by 15 participants. 136 participants were
drawn from the wards of the Bushbuckridge municipality. About 150 members
of Parliament also participated.

This year’s theme was “Parliament empowering communities for poverty
eradication” and was
discussed in three separate commissions under the following topics:


 1.   Sustainable development


 2.   Role of the public in poverty eradication


 3.   Education and health in poverty eradication


The discussions in the commissions also reflected on the reports of
previous People’s Assemblies relevant to the topics.

3.    Summary of activities

The People’s Assembly was preceded by a community meeting held at the
Margaret Nanana Mhlanga Memorial Hall in Oakly, Mpumalanga on 11 September
2008. The purpose of the community meeting was to inform the community
about the People’s Assembly and how they could participate in the oversight
work that would be undertaken by committees of parliament prior to the
commencement of the People’s Assembly.

The committees of the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces undertook oversight work on 15 and 16 September. The committees
visited various service delivery points in and around the Bushbuckridge
municipal area that were relevant to the portfolios that were represented
to gather firsthand information about issues affecting the community. The
portfolios that were represented by the committees included social
development, health, education, agriculture and land affairs, labour, water
affairs, and trade and industry.

The People’s Assembly commenced with a plenary on 17 September where
participants were welcomed and the objectives of the 2008 People’s Assembly
explained. Thereafter participants attended discussions in commissions. On
18 September the People’s Assembly was linked, via satellite, with
provincial assemblies. The Premier of the Province, Mr T S P Makwetla,
addressed the People’s Assembly. A consolidated report of oversight work by
parliamentary committees was presented. This was followed by presentation
of reports from the commissions. Questions and comments were then
entertained from the nine provincial sites and from the national site.
Ministers present, the Premier, members of the provincial executive
committee and members of Parliament responded to questions. Mr M J
Mahlangu, the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, gave a vote
of thanks.




B.    PLENARY AND DISCUSSIONS IN COMMISSIONS (17 SEPTEMBER)

Chairperson:     Ms P M Hollander, MP, Deputy Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces

Ms P M Hollander welcomed the Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, the Premier of Mpumalanga, T S P Makwetla, the
Speaker of the Mpumalanga Legislature, Mrs Y N Phosa, the Acting Mayor of
Bushbuckridge, Ms M S Mashego, all participating members of Parliament and
members of the Provincial Legislature, representatives of the House of
Traditional Leaders, Councillors and participants.

Ms Hollander thanked all participants for their support of parliamentary
programmes in the province, and their participation in the People’s
Assembly. She invited Mr M J Mahlangu, MP, to open the People’s Assembly
and welcome participants.

1.    Opening and welcome

Mr Mahlangu welcomed the participants. He indicated that this was the fifth
People’s Assembly and urged members of Parliament to pay attention to
people’s concerns. He said that poverty eradication was not only a South
African issue but a universal problem. The United Nations Development
Programme had identified a lack of water and sanitation as the main two
drivers of poverty worldwide.

Mr Mahlangu said that Parliament was keen to assist communities in their
fight against poverty. There should be a visible legacy left behind by the
occasion especially in light of the fact that this was the last People’s
Assembly of the Third Parliament. He suggested that the concept of a
People’s Assembly should be continued in the Fourth Parliament.
2.    Context and background to the People’s Assembly

Mr K O Bapela, House Chairperson in the National Assembly gave a brief
presentation about the People’s Assembly.

Mr Bapela said that the Constitution enjoined Parliament to ensure public
participation. This interaction and participation happened, among others,
through the opportunity to make submissions to Parliament and its
committees. People must have the opportunity to express their views on
legislation and policies. Parliament initiated the People’s Assembly as a
vehicle to fulfill people’s participation in parliamentary processes.  He
noted that the People’s Assembly was also a mechanism that was meant to
assist parliamentarians to address challenges facing communities. Policies
must be implemented with a view to improving people’s lives.
Parliamentarians are public representatives and must deliver on promises
made to the public. The idea was therefore that the People’s Assembly
should give feedback to the communities, inter alia, on issues of service
delivery.

3.    Input on how Parliament functions and the importance of public
     participation

Mr M B Skosana, House Chairperson in the National Assembly made a
presentation on how Parliament functions and the importance of public
participation.

Mr Skosana said that the National Assembly was elected to represent the
people, to elect the President, to provide a national forum for public
consideration of issues, to pass legislation, to scrutinise and to oversee
executive action. By comparison the National Council of Provinces was
elected to represent the provinces, to ensure that provincial interests are
taken into account in the national sphere of government by participating in
the national legislative process and by providing a national forum for
public consideration of issues affecting provinces.

In terms of sections 57 and 70 of the Constitution, the National Assembly
and the National Council of Provinces respectively, are separate and
independent. The two Houses are thus not accountable to any of the other
two arms of government, but are directly accountable to the electorate.

Mr Skosana went further to explain that Parliament functioned through its
committees and that each House had its own separate committees. However,
there were joint committees for joint business of both Houses.

Furthermore, section 59 of  the  Constitution  provided  that  the  National
Assembly must facilitate public involvement in its  processes  and  that  of
its committees, conduct  its  business  in  an  open  manner  and  hold  its
sittings and those of its committees in public. A number  of  measures  were
employed by Parliament to facilitate public participation, including  public
hearings,  submissions,  petitions,  the  People’s   Assembly,   the   Youth
Parliament and Taking Parliament to  the  People.  Parliament  had  recently
started the process  of  establishing  Parliamentary  Democracy  Offices  in
different provinces. These offices were  aimed  at  strengthening  the  link
between Parliament and the people, especially in the remote rural  areas  of
the various provinces. People can contact Parliament through these offices.

4.    Objectives and anticipated outcomes for 17 and 18 September

Mr G Q M Doidge, House Chairperson in the National Assembly took the
participants through the programme for 17 and 18 September.

Mr Doidge explained that the objective of the People’s Assembly is for
members of Parliament and communities to together identify challenges
facing the people.  Participants in the People’s Assembly are expected to
make inputs on the challenges that they identify in each thematic area. The
inputs would be reflected in a report that would be discussed in
Parliament. Recommendations in the report would be forwarded to the
Executive.  Parliament would use the report to monitor Executive responses
to some of the issues raised by participants.

5.    Commission breakaways

5.1   Commission one: Sustainable development

Chairperson:     Mr L Zita, MP.

Mr L Zita made a brief introductory comment. He said that sustainable
development is a pattern of resource usage that aims to meet human needs
while preserving the environment so that these needs could be met not only
in the present, but also in the indefinite future. Eradication of poverty
is one of the biggest challenges confronting sustainable development in
South Africa. Sustainable development can be conceptually deconstructed
into three important parts: environmental sustainability, economic
sustainability and socio-political sustainability.

5.1.1 Inputs and comments

Environmental legislation, policies and programmes
    • The National Framework for Sustainable Development (NFSD) identifies
      key areas for intervention based on an integrated analysis of trends.
    • There is a mismatch between environmental policies and legislation on
      the one hand and practice on the other hand.
    • Planning capacity at the municipal level is generally poor, resulting
      in reactive rather than proactive approaches to the challenges of
      sustainable development. Consequently, Integrated Development Plans
      (IDPs) do not reflect local priorities or realities, where they do,
      they remain largely unimplemented due to lack of prior experience in
      operationalising development plans.
    • Environmental sustainability is often neglected  in  decision  making.
      Decisions should result in good economic and environmental outcomes.
    • Environmental policies require  review  and  innovative  environmental
      programmes are required to reduce air pollution.
    • The  Sustainable  Development  Policy  has  not  yet  been  passed  by
      Parliament; this results in conflicting mandates between departments.




Public education
    • Civil society organisations need to be strengthened to enhance their
      ability to monitor government and to interact on a more equal footing
      with the private sector.
    • There is a need  to  further  develop  the  role  of  NGOs  in  public
      education.
    • Communities should be educated about sustainable development and the
      importance of integrating it into their lives. Projects will only
      succeed if communities are educated and consulted.
    • Education by the government on water and electricity use is urgently
      needed.
    • Communities are not educated, informed and developed. Information
      available at the national level is not disseminated to people at the
      local level.

The role of Parliament
    • Parliament and parliamentarians have an  important  role  to  play  in
      enacting legislation that can lead to the  attainment  of  sustainable
      development and reduction of poverty.
    • Parliament has a crucial role to play in the  sustainable  development
      agenda, not only on the national political  stage,  but  also  at  the
      grassroots level,  particularly  given  the  enormity  of  development
      challenges faced by South Africa.
    • There  is  a  need  for  collective  responsibility  between  Cabinet,
      different  government  departments  and  Parliament   as   there   are
      conflicting mandates in different departments.
    • There was  concern  regarding  Hoedspruit  having  been  removed  from
      Mpumalanga.

Environmental beneficiation
    • Sustainable Development projects championed within communities need to
      be monitored  and  benefit  the  communities.  Communities  should  be
      assisted to develop business plans in order for projects to succeed.
    • Communities should benefit in the commercial  profitability  of  their
      resources and not only  be  utilised  as  workers.  Skilled  community
      members need to be involved in projects.
    • People should be skilled to run projects on farms. Individuals  within
      the community should be targeted for specialised training required  to
      make the project a success.
    • Most resources were taken away and the community did not get anything
      in return. When game reserves were established people were evicted,
      but after the development, workers and the community did not benefit
      from this development.
    • Developed countries are taking ownership of South Africa’s natural
      resources. People living next to these resources are very poor.
    • Foreign people own the wealth of communities and local involvement in
      development is limited.
    • Game lodges are owned by foreigners and locals do not benefit, not
      even through job creation.
    • There is a demand for land to be mined but locals do not reap the
      benefits. Mining companies do not reinvest in communities in which
      they are situated.
    • There is insufficient job creation and  the lack of factories in
      Bushbuckridge impacts on the sustainability of the area.
    • Disabled people are skilled but have no work.
    • Unfair trading barriers must be removed.
    • People in Bushbuckridge own cattle but do not have profitable
      marketing opportunities.
    • People have been given land that is not productive and they do not
      know how to create a sustainable living from it.

Availability of infrastructure and land
    • An infrastructure development grant was given to  Bushbuckridge  as  a
      presidential nodal point to address water shortages.
    •  Land  claims  have  resulted  in  investors  withdrawing   from   the
      Bushbuckridge area.
    • Some of the land claims have not been considered or finalised.
    • There are no policy positions in municipalities regarding the need for
      land for development purposes.
    •  The  places  declared  as  heritage  sites  are  still  inhabited  or
      privatised.
    •  Although  funds  are  channelled  to  provision  of  infrastructures,
      defective structures are built.
    • The roads in Mapulaneng are bad, there is a lack of water (the town
      was without water for three months) and poor service delivery by the
      municipality.
    • Bushbuckridge is a dry area, even if it rains the boreholes are unable
      to retain water. Pipes were laid but water has not been supplied.
    • There is a need for roads, bridges and graveyards.
    • The demand for electricity is very high and sanitation projects are
      lagging behind.
    • The sale of developed land to foreigners results in minimal land being
      available to build houses for local people.
    • There is a lack of facilities for the community; there are no
      playgrounds for children and old age homes are only in towns and not
      in the rural areas where they are needed most.

Utilisation of resources
    • Trees are being cleared in residential areas and buildings are erected
      which results in global warming.
    • People are collecting sand for building;  this  has  resulted  in  big
      holes developing behind houses.

Waste management
    • There is a problem with waste management, this includes household,
      medical and industrial waste.
    • The dumping of toxic waste is a health risk and the municipalities are
      not able to manage waste dumps.
    • Dustbins are only serviced once a month and there are no empty sites
      for the dumping of waste, more trucks are required to pick up waste.
    • Municipalities do not have the capability to deal with cleaning and
      cleansing of public areas.

5.1.2 Achievements
 • The various government departments are trying to redress the problems of
   the past.
    • Social welfare is providing support by protecting people who cannot
      take care of themselves, for example, via the child support grant.
    • The commitment to decrease green house gasses is an initiative that
      was started some time ago.
    • The NFSD has systems based on integration specifically for sustainable
      development.
 • People with HIV and Aids are recycling leaves and producing plastics out
   of the leaves.
    • As part of a poverty eradication project, plastics are collected and
      shoes and socks produced.

5.1.3 Recommendations
    • There is a need for collective responsibility for environmental
      governance. The environment is not the responsibility of one
      department. Greater integration between departments needs to be
      championed at Cabinet level.
    • The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism should embark on
      workshops to raise environmental awareness.
    • Parliament should consider a process to adjust provincial boundaries
      in order to bring Hoedspruit back into Mpumalanga.
    • The allocation of land subsequent to claims being processed should be
      monitored by government. Land is sold by claimants just months after
      receipt, because the new owners are not in a position to manage the
      land or to ensure sustainability. Attempts should be made to retain
      and attract investors when land claims are finalised.
    • The expertise to manage farms should be maintained after land claims
      have been finalised and people with managerial and other needed skills
      should be retained on a salary basis.
    • Basic infrastructure should be addressed as rural development is a key
      pillar in the fight against poverty.
    • When development is taking place and roads are built, the landscape
      should be taken into consideration as it might have an impact on the
      biodiversity of the area.
    • Corridors should be created to ensure the free flow of animals.
    • Proper consultation should take place between the owners of mines and
      the communities. Communities should share in the wealth created by
      mines.
    • Attention should be given to areas where trees are cleared and
      buildings erected to reduce the impact of global warming.
    • Climate change should be studied in order to minimise rural migration
      and the community should be informed and educated when climate change
      issues are being considered.
    • There should be monitoring of projects in general and the unsuccessful
      projects should be evaluated to establish the reason for the failure.
      The benefits of projects should be transferred to the community.
    • People at grass-roots level should be consulted on projects as they
      have a better knowledge of the needs of their communities. Communities
      must also have the opportunity to identify projects for themselves and
      seek funding.
    • When projects are started the community should be consulted and
      participants should be trained in order to assist them in the
      development of sustainable projects.
    • Investors should be encouraged to invest near the townships where
      people are residing.
    • Field officers should be appointed to monitor projects and give
      guidance to ensure that projects facilitate sustainable development
      within the community.
    • The youth and the elderly should be employed at legal dump sites.
    • People should be educated to recycle and recycling initiatives should
      be embarked upon.
    • The number of refuse trucks should be increased to ensure that waste
      is removed on a regular basis.
    • A dam would solve the water shortage problem in the area; the river
      Balula can be used to feed the dam. This should also assist with the
      creation of jobs.
    • The community should have shares in new developments and ventures,
      that is, game reserves and people should benefit from the influx of
      tourists.
    • People should be educated on the environment, namely the impact of
      development and how to conserve the environment.
    • Solar energy should be introduced as few people can afford
      electricity.
    • Available resources should be regulated and monitored to ensure its
      sustainable use.

5.2 Commission two: The role of the public in poverty eradication
Co-Chairpersons: Mr S L Tsenoli, MP.
                 Mr S Shiceka, MP.

At the commencement of the session, the co-chairpersons emphasised that the
discussion of the commission should primarily focus on the role of the
public in eradicating poverty, as much had been said in various forums
about the role of government in alleviating poverty amongst poor
communities. However, they said that participants were not censored from re-
articulating the role of government in this regard.

5.2.1 Inputs and comments

Natural resources
    • There was overwhelming consensus that Bushbuckridge has suitable land
      for farming and good potential for tourism.
    • Communities should be mobilised to identify and protect indigenous
      knowledge and traditional medicines with a long term view of
      protecting them from commercial piracy.
    • In the past many projects had failed but it is not clear what caused
      those failures.

Utilisation of available sport facilities
      Existing sport facilities in communities should be identified for
      utilisation by the youth. A campaign encouraging the youth to
      participate in sport should be started as some youth may succeed in
      sport and financially uplift themselves and their families. The
      campaign may also discourage youth from delinquency and thus
      discourage them from participating in illegal activities such as drug
      abuse. Institutions such as government departments and the Umsobomvu
      Youth Fund can be approached for assistance in this regard.

Lack of essential documents
    • The oversight visits by portfolio committees revealed that almost a
      quarter of the residents of Bushbuckridge do not have one or the other
      necessary documents such as an identity book, birth certificate, etc.
      It was emphasised that without these documents, community members will
      not be able to access government services such as old age pensions,
      grants, housing and other services.
    • It was felt that information on government services is centralized
      and ordinary people, especially in rural areas, are not able to
      access it.
    • In general there is a lack of civil education on government services
      and as a result communities do not understand the policies and
      programmes of government. Where available, officials manning these
      offices do not adhere to Batho Pele principles.

Delayed processing of land claims applications
      Progress on the finalisation of land claims is not being reported. For
      years now, despite the expectations created by the government,
      communities that had lodged land claims have no land to farm or work.

Disabled people
    • Disabled people are not adequately recognised and assisted by both the
      public and government.
    • Disabled people are often not able to access government buildings and
      consequently they cannot access services provided by government to the
      public. Government departments need to adhere to and implement
      policies on disabilities. Communities should acknowledge and support
      disabled people.
    • There was a call for funding to train disabled people. Communities
      need to be tolerant towards disabled people.

Foreign-owned businesses
    • Many foreign nationals own businesses within communities, but they are
      not committed to developing entrepreneurial skills or provide
      employment to any of the members of the communities who accommodate
      them.
    • In some instance foreigners’ operations also have a negative impact on
      the environment.


Adult basic education and training teachers
    • A concern was raised about fulltime teachers who are also employed by
      Abet Centers as Adult Basic Education and Training teachers after
      normal school hours. This affected the quality of work of these
      teachers at both levels.
    • Currently Abet teachers in other provinces such as Gauteng are paid
      slightly higher than those employed in Mpumalanga. This disparity in
      salaries resulted in a high turnover and brain drain by qualified
      teachers to other province.

Establishment of firefighting teams
      During Autumn, Mpumalanga is susceptible to raging veld fires which
      usually ravage natural resources such as forestry, vegetation,
      agricultural crops and live stock. This results in loss of revenue and
      jobs for the people of the province and thus add to the outflow of
      scarce skills.
Former farm workers
      There are a number of unemployed and skilled former farm workers in
      the community, who had been exploited on farms or badly treated as
      labour tenants in the previous dispensation. There was a need to
      develop special programmes to encourage them to rejoin farming.

Other comments and concerns
    • A new definition of poverty was necessary in order to identify the
      poorest of the poor in relation to urban and rural areas. This
      delineation would help allocate the necessary resources on the basis
      of established need.
    • Allegations were made that some councillors take and implement other
      people’s ideas for personal benefit.
    • Communities should be involved in the development and finalisation of
      IDPs. In order for communities to be involved, IPDs of municipalities
      should address challenges in relation to provision of resources for
      communities.
    • Bushbuckridge suffers from lack of resources such as water, roads,
      electricity etc. and this contributes hugely to poverty.
    • Communities must also focus on other opportunities such as mining and
      not only farming.
    • Communities must mobilise against corruption and nepotism to retain
      the gains brought about by government services.
    • NOGs should form clusters in order to avoid unnecessary competition in
      providing services especially to the youth.
    • Leaders do not disseminate information to the public and sometimes do
      not allow the public to participate in public participation
      programmes.
    • Establishment of mini-factories in residential areas should be
      encouraged. These factories can manufacture things like window and
      door frames etc.
5.2.2 Recommendations
    • Communities should be encouraged to form business co-operatives.  In
      addition, training in entrepreneurial and managerial skills should be
      provided in order to make entrepreneurs sustainable.
    • There should be continuous monitoring and evaluation of the co-
      operatives by both communities and government. Government projects
      must not only benefit the politically connected as is the case
      currently. They must be accessible to all qualifying business co-
      operatives in order to benefit broader society.
    • People whose ideas were stolen by councillors should report the matter
      to the relevant authorities, for example the Mayor, Members of the
      Executive Council or members of Parliament.
    • Funding should be sourced for managerial, financial and project
      management skills training.
    • Markets should be identified for selling community products.
    • The stringent government procurement policies must be reviewed.
    • Primary and secondary schools should introduce relevant agricultural
      and tourism programmes as soon as possible. To augment the basic
      agricultural knowledge acquired at school level, closed education
      institutions such as the former Bushbuckridge College of Education,
      the venue for the People’s Assembly event, must be revived as
      agricultural training institutions.
    • Where possible, multipurpose centers should be utilised to educate the
      youth about the importance of farming and agriculture.
    • Mobile and/or satellite offices must be established and manned by
      trained officials who will train and help the poor through workshops
      and other forums. Municipalities, Sector Education and Training
      Authorities and NGOs must also assist in the training of communities.
    • The government must expedite the processing of land claim
      applications. A commission of enquiry should be established to
      investigate the delay around the processing of these applications.
    • Businesses owned by foreign nationals should be adequately regulated
      regardless of the size and a special surcharge should be implemented
      for entrepreneurial skills training of local communities. Communities
      must also tap into the knowledge and skills of these foreign nationals
      so that when they leave the country, the skills remain.
    • Uniform standards for employment of Abet teachers should be
      established by the national Department of Education as a matter of
      urgency. In addition, Abet teachers should be trained further to meet
      the current skills demands.
    • Government must improve rural communication and contact networks.
    • Communities must establish fire fighting teams in order to manage veld
      fires in the area. The government and the private sector could be
      approached to assist where necessary.

5.3   Commission  three:  The  role  of  education  and  health  in  poverty
eradication

Co- Chairpersons:      Prof S M Mayathula, MP.
                 Ms J Masilo, MP.

The commission decided to divide the topic into two sub–topics  as  follows:
“the role of education in poverty eradication” and the “role  of  health  in
poverty eradication”. The role  of  education  in  poverty  eradication  was
considered first.

5.3.1 The role of education in poverty eradication

Prof Mayatula, in his introductory  remarks  noted  that  previous  People’s
Assemblies identified the strengthening of Abet programmes  which  were  not
adequately  rolled  out  in  rural  areas  as  one  of  the  key  areas  for
intervention. The issue of inclusive education was also mentioned.

5.3.1.1     Inputs and comments

School buildings and infrastructure
    • As a result of the drying-up of bore-holes and mismanagement of  water
      resources in the  Bushbuckridge  area  most  schools  do  not  have  a
      constant supply of water.
    • Despite being on a priority list for  renovations,  poorly  built  and
      dilapidated school buildings have not yet being renovated.
    • Mud schools built by the community are in a state of collapse and pose
      a danger to learners, as a result schooling takes  place  under  trees
      and/or in tents.
    • The Portfolio Committee  on  Education  had  observed  a  shortage  of
      schools  in  the  Bushbuckridge  area  and  overcrowding  in  existing
      schools.


Early childhood development and reception level
    • Government must establish more early childhood development centres.
    • Grade R teachers are paid their salaries after three months  of  work,
      which makes them unable to support their families.
    • Some Grade R teachers earn up to R1000 per month. Failure to pay  them
      good salaries demotivates them and affects their performance in class.
    •  Some Grade R teachers are paid by School Governing Bodies.

School nutrition
    • Nutrition at schools is not  being  adequately  provided.  Instead  of
      being served at least three different fresh vegetables per week as per
      the requirement, learners are only served butternut.
    • Caregivers in the school nutrition scheme, especially those  who  look
      after learners who have a learning disability, need to be remunerated.
    • The R400 per month stipend paid to school nutrition caregivers is  too
      little to be an effective poverty eradication tool.

Learners with disabilities
    • Volunteers  who  care  for  people  with  disabilities,  such  as  the
      volunteers of the Lulekani Project, should be paid a  stipend  because
      they provide a very important service to the community.
    • There is no access to educational facilities,  especially  for  people
      with disabilities.
    • There is also no transport for people with disabilities to  travel  to
      education institutions and even to government events that  are  hosted
      by the Department of Education.
    • In spite of  the  fact  that  Further  Education  and  Training  (FET)
      colleges are funded by Government, they do not accommodate people with
      disabilities.
    • People with disabilities, especially the visually  impaired,  are  not
      granted bursaries by the department or by private companies.
    • The visually impaired cannot study  mathematics  and  science  because
      educational institutions do  not  have  assistive  devices,  therefore
      people with disabilities will always be trapped in a vicious cycle  of
      poverty.
    •  There  are  no  higher  learning   institutions   for   people   with
      disabilities, especially the  deaf  and  the  visually  impaired.  The
      government  should  make  existing  institutions  of  higher  learning
      accessible to people with disabilities by providing assistive  devices
      such as sign language interpreting, Braille etc.
    • There is no specialised transport for learners to travel  to  tertiary
      institutions.
    •  There  is  no  proper  infrastructure  to  cater  for   people   with
      disabilities at the existing schools, especially for the deaf and  the
      visually impaired.
    • There are no wheelchair  ramps  in  educational  facilities  and  some
      buildings are not complete.
    • The  deaf  and  the  blind  are  excluded  from  the  few  learnership
      programmes available.
    • Sign language is not taught at lower levels of education.

Adult basic education and training
   Women and the elderly travel long distances to  access  Abet  facilities,
   this poses a safety risk.


Availability of teachers, quality  of  education  and  free  and  compulsory
education
    • There is a shortage of mathematics and science teachers which leads to
      learners obtaining poor results in those subjects.
    • The criteria for the appointment of senior teachers are not clear.
    • There is no career guidance to assist learners to select subjects that
      will afford them good job opportunities.
    • There is a lack of learner support material.
    • There are delays in the provision of free and compulsory education  by
      government.
    • There is no consistency between the  curriculum  at  secondary  school
      level and tertiary level.
    • There is only one Mpumalanga  Regional  Training  Trust  which  offers
      skills development in the province instead of four as planned;
    • There is no  trade  centre  in  Mpumalanga  to  accommodate  technical
      students in order to do trade  tests  to  prepare  for  employment  on
      completion of their studies.
    • There are no libraries and laboratories in the communities  to  assist
      learners with their studies.
    • Schools in the Bushbuckridge area are classified into quintiles one,
      two and three. Schools in the region suffer on account of cross
      provincial border anomalies, for example, schools which had been
      classified as quintile 2 schools while under Limpopo, are now
      categorised as quintile 3 schools under Mpumalanga, and as a result
      lose out on being classified as ‘No fee’ schools.  This results in
      young learners having to cross busy national or main roads running
      through the village in order to get to suitable schools.

Learners with learning difficulties
    • There are no trained professionals  who  can  identify  children  with
      learning disabilities  at  schools.  This  results  in  such  learners
      dropping out as they cannot cope as a result of their difficulties.
    • There is a need for the establishment of  centres  which  will  assist
      learners with  learning  disabilities  with  language  competency  and
      skills.
    • There is also a need for the establishment  of  a  centre  which  will
      train teachers to educate learners who have learning disabilities.


Institutions of higher learning
    • There are no universities in Mpumalanga.
    • Tertiary institutions such as Hoshane and Mapulaneng were closed  down
      and  they  have  become  white  elephants.  That  decision  should  be
      revisited with the aim of reviving them.
    • Tertiary education is expensive and unaffordable even to middle  class
      parents.

Learner pregnancy
    • There’s an alarming increase in teenage pregnancy  in  schools,  which
      also raises the  issue  of  increased  vulnerability  of  learners  to
      HIV/Aids.
    • Pregnant learners are not allowed to write  their  examinations,  this
      may exacerbate the levels of illiteracy  and  may  lead  to  increased
      poverty among the youths.
5.3.1.2     Responses

    • Section 29(1) of the Constitution of  the  Republic  provides  that  “
      everyone has the right to a basic  education,  including  adult  basic
      education”. To this end government is providing Abet free of charge
    • Grade Rs have to move away from  communities  and  become  part  of  a
      formal school curriculum. This will ensure free education from Grade R
      to Grade 9.
    • Prioritisation of schools for upgrading is done  at  the  regional  or
      school circuit level, not at provincial level. School  principals  and
      School Governing Bodies must ensure that  their  schools  are  on  the
      priority list, and they must insist on getting a copy of the list from
      officials.
    • Ramps  will  be  installed  for  people  with  disabilities  in  those
      facilities that have none.
    •  The  teacher  colleges  were  not  closed  but  attached   to   other
      institutions of higher learning.
    • The department will look at the issue of stipends for school nutrition
      caregivers and learnership programmes.  Specific  cases  such  as  the
      Lulekani project will be followed up.
    • The department will address the issue of overcrowding  in  schools,  a
      problem which MPs themselves observed during committee  visits  around
      the Bushbuckridge area. In one instance the ratio was 53 classes to 20
      teachers.
    • Learner have to be an all-rounder at secondary school  level  so  that
      they are able to adjust or  go  to  any  area.  The  Revised  National
      Curriculum Statement (RNCS) is designed to develop  learners  so  that
      they start thinking as if they were at tertiary level.
    • There is no specific criterion set out for the appointment of a senior
      teacher. Like everyone else, teachers compete for positions  based  on
      merit.
    • The age of children who receive a social grant is currently up  to  14
      years of age. From 2009 onwards it will go up by one year  every  year
      until it reaches 18 years.
    • The department will provide  teachers  with  the  skills  to  identify
      learners with a learning disabilities.
    • The department will look at the  issue  of  bringing  higher  learning
      institutions for the disabled closer to the communities, and  look  at
      providing transport in the meanwhile.
    • There are no-fee schools that communities have  to  utilise  to  avoid
      expensive school fees. This means that from Grade R up until  Grade  9
      government has introduced free  education  which  should  benefit  the
      poor. For tertiary education,  government  has  set  up  the  National
      Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) in order to  assist  students  at
      public higher education institutions with loans and bursaries.
    • Compulsory education will be introduced in phases.
    • The 7% used  for  administration  by  the  department  in  the  school
      nutrition scheme is not a national norm.  This  means  that  provinces
      have the latitude to increase this figure in order to be able  to  pay
      stipends of more than R400  to  volunteer  caregivers  in  the  school
      nutrition scheme.

5.3.1.3     Recommendations
    • Provincial departments should urgently consider rebuilding  collapsing
      schools and replacing mud-built structures.
    • Schools without water supply should be  supplied  with  boreholes  and
      tanks.
    • The recruitment of qualified mathematics and science  teachers  should
      be prioritised.
    • The proper supply of fresh produce to the schools should be  regularly
      done and closely monitored.
    • Speed humps should be erected on the roads to avoid learners being hit
      by vehicles when crossing the roads on their way to school.
    • Transport should be provided for the disabled and the elderly in order
      to attend schools and other departmental activities.
    • The department should involve  the  communities  in  identifying  what
      could be done to stop teenage pregnancies.
    • Libraries and laboratories need to be built nearer to the communities.

5.3.2 The role of health in poverty eradication

Ms Masilo, in her introduction, detailed the  relationship  between  poverty
and health. She made particular reference to access to health,  people  with
disabilities, communicable diseases such as HIV and Aids,  tuberculosis  and
malaria.

5.3.2.1     Comments and inputs

Availability of health care workers
    • There is a  huge  shortage  of  nurses,  doctors  and  counsellors  at
      clinics, especially in the rural areas.
    • Community workers and volunteers are not funded although they work  24
      hours.
    • Nursing colleges are far from communities.
    • Doctors are imported from Cuba and other  countries  to  overcome  the
      existing shortage of medical personnel.


Availability of facilities, equipment and medicines
    • The Department of Health is always under funded.
    • Clinics often run out of medication  and  patients  are  offered  only
      Panado.
    • Some clinics have no water supply, they have broken toilet  seats  and
      they have poor maintenance standards.
    • The lack of resources at clinics often result in  patients  having  to
      bring their own stationery on which to write reports  and  records  of
      their illnesses.
    • There are no telephone lines at some clinics as a result of theft  and
      nurses are compelled to use their cellular phones to communicate  with
      the department.
    • Mobile clinics do not arrive on the dates and times as scheduled.
    • Government needs to build more clinics as traveling becomes a  problem
      for the elderly and the disabled, especially at Madjembeni village.
    • Medication is highly priced at the pharmacies.  Government  should  do
      something to curb the unscrupulous behaviour of medical aid schemes.
    • There is a shortage of shoes  for  the  people  with  disabilities  at
      clinics and hospitals.
    • Some clinics do not have wheel chairs to assist patients.
    • There is a shortage of ambulances at clinics and hospitals.
    • There are long waiting lists for  beds  at  hospitals  to  accommodate
      patients.
    • Some facilities at clinics are not conducive to the storing of certain
      medicines.

Disabled people
    • People with disabilities have no access to vital information regarding
      HIV/Aids.
    • Information is not available to the blind by means of Braille.
    • The blind cannot read  the  expiry  dates  on  their  medication,  and
      there’s no sign language interpreting for those who cannot speak.
    •  People  with  disabilities  were  previously  trained  on  issues  of
      HIV/Aids, but they are not appointed when positions become available.

Inadequate services
    • Operating times of clinics are a problem as some close at 3 or 5pm and
      do not open on weekends.
    • There  is  loss  of  confidence  in  clinics  because  of  their  poor
      performance in service delivery, resulting in people having to  travel
      long distances in order to reach hospitals.
    • Hospitals do not  accept  patients  without  a  referral  letter  from
      clinics.
    • People stay in long queues for the whole day  after  having  travelled
      long distances.
    • The department is not assisting in fighting teenage pregnancy.
    • There is an alarming increase in teenage  pregnancy  in  schools  and,
      unfortunately, pregnancy goes along with HIV/Aids.
    • Teenage pregnancy exacerbates poverty because pregnant girls  are  not
      permitted to write exams.
    • The child support grant is too little, and this results  in  teenagers
      getting pregnant repeatedly in order to collect more grants.
    • Emphasis is put only on HIV/Aids,  TB,  malaria,  etc,  more  emphasis
      should be put into addressing cancer because it also claims the  lives
      of many people.

5.3.2.2     Responses
    • Patients who are not on the critical list should be encouraged  to  go
      and convalesce at home in order to free up  beds  for  those  who  are
      critical.
    • Parents, religious leaders and cultural organisations should encourage
      and promote celibacy  among  the  youth  to  minimise  the  spread  of
      HIV/Aids and teenage pregnancy.
    • The relevant parliamentary committee  should  ask  the  Department  of
      Health to account better with  regard  to  the  monitoring  of  funds,
      because it is obvious that funds allocated for  certain  projects  are
      not spent on those projects.
    • The department fails to pay its suppliers, therefore the suppliers  do
      not deliver medicines at hospitals and clinics.
    • The department should provide assistive devices such as hearing  aids,
      wheelchairs, etc.
    • Infrastructure at health facilities is vandalised by  members  of  the
      communities in which  those  facilities  are  located.  The  Community
      Policing Forums must assist in curbing the vandalising of property  in
      health facilities. Members of the community must  desist  from  buying
      stolen window frames, doors etc, to discourage theft, and must act  to
      protect public facilities because they have been  provided  for  their
      benefit.
    • There is a  general  lack  of  hygiene  at  the  Lydenburg  and  Sabie
      Hospitals.
    • People in rural areas suffer because local nurses  prefer  to  go  and
      serve in other provinces.
    • The local management structures in all provinces should  know  how  to
      access specialist services such as laboratory and orthopedic services,
      if not, they should contact the Chief Director.

5.3.2.3     Recommendations
    • Government should introduce a voucher or card system  which  could  be
      used to purchase nappies, baby food, clothing and  groceries,  instead
      of giving out cash.
    • Clinics and hospitals can not afford  to  run  out  of  medicines  and
      stationery, especially  medicines,  therefore  they  need  to  conduct
      constant stock taking to avoid shortages.
    •  Communities  should  accompany  people  who  need  interpretation  to
      facilities.
    • Mobile clinics should inform the communities in time  when  they  will
      not be available for the next date.
    • Clinics and hospitals should be maintained regularly.
    • Hospitals should not turn people who do not  have  a  referral  letter
      from clinics away.
    • Government should provide a 24-hour service at clinics.
    • Security should be beefed up at clinics, and where there is  none,  it
      should be provided.
    • The department should provide enough beds at hospitals to  accommodate
      people.
    • Ambulances should be  made  available  and  even  sourced  from  other
      provinces.
    • Provincial departments should attend to all the concerns raised and  a
      task team should be formed to follow up on progress made.
    • Communities should  submit  their  complaints  to  their  constituency
      offices regarding these issues.
    • The department must train nurses who will serve their  own  provinces.
      Nurses should be proud of where they come from and should endeavour to
      uplift their own communities.
    • Government should establish nursing colleges in rural  areas  so  that
      local children can serve their own communities.
    • Enough funds should be sourced for the  department  and  be  carefully
      monitored.


C.    PLENARY AND REPORTS FROM COMMISSIONS (18 SEPTEMBER)

Chairperson: Mr M J Mahlangu, MP, Chairperson of  the  National  Council  of
Provinces

The Chairperson of the National Council of  Provinces  took  the  Chair  and
invited Mr T S P Makwetla, the Premier of Mpumalaga to address the  plenary.


1.    Address by Mr T S P Makwetla, MPL, Premier of Mpumalanga

The  Premier  of  Mpumalanga,  Mr  Makwetla,  indicated  that  the  People’s
Assembly provided ordinary people  with  an  opportunity  to  interact  with
Parliament and express their  views  about  poverty,  service  delivery  and
other  challenges  confronting  them.  For  Parliament,  the  event  was  an
opportunity to reach out and engage with communities from all walks of  life
in  order  to  develop  and  formulate  solutions  to  address  poverty  and
development challenges facing  the  country.  Furthermore,  by  holding  the
event  annually,  Parliament  was  strengthening  its  oversight  role   and
enhancing accountability by government on development and  service  delivery
commitments.

Mr Makwetla said that public participation in  matters  of  development  and
service delivery was a critical hallmark of a democratic state that  upholds
the values of transparency and accountability  to  the  electorate.  Through
the People’s Assembly law-makers were broadening  opportunities  for  public
participation.

He  emphasised  that  it  was  crucial  for  government  to  implement   the
recommendations of the participants in order to  tackle  the  challenges  of
underdevelopment, poverty and unemployment. The  provincial  government  had
already  implemented  an  array  of  programmes   such   as   infrastructure
development,   local   economic   development   and    created    employment
opportunities in order to tackle these challenges. It  also  has  programmes
to ensure access to quality education for all children and  the  sustainable
provision of health care services to all communities, especially those  that
are economically depressed.

He further urged government to empower communities in  an  effort  to  fight
poverty, unemployment and service delivery by increasing access  to  poverty
alleviation programmes, self-employment and economic  opportunities,  access
to finance and mentorship to support entrepreneurs and small businesses  for
the poor. Alongside these initiatives, there was still  a  need  to  enhance
direct support to poor households  through  social  grants  and  free  basic
services.

He reminded members of Parliament that the positive impact of  the  People’s
Assembly on the people would depend  on  how  government  responded  to  the
challenges that have been  raised  and  follow  up  on  issues  raised.  The
government Mpumalanga province  was  committed  to  ensuring  that  all  the
issues raised by the communities were properly tracked and responded  to  by
the relevant entities at various levels of government.

He  concluded  by  thanking  Parliament  for  choosing   the   Bushbuckridge
municipality as a venue for the 2008 People’s Assembly.



2.    Address by the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr  M
     J Mahlangu, MP

Mr Mahlangu welcomed all the participants  to  the  event  and  tendered  an
apology for the Speaker of the National Assembly who was  unable  to  attend
owing to ill-health.

He pointed out  that  this  year’s  People’s  Assembly  coincided  with  the
marking of the United  Nation’s  International  Day  of  Democracy  and  the
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration  on  Democracy  Day
by the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).

The reports of the previous People’s Assemblies, including the 2008  report,
would be consolidated with a view to identifying  the  recurring  challenges
that needed to be addressed in order to  achieve  the  goal  of  eradicating
poverty and hunger.

The comprehensive report would be used to assist the  Fourth  Parliament  to
sharpen its response to the various challenges the  nation  faced.  However,
the  current  Parliament  would  still  be  seized  with  issues  that  were
immediately before it.

Mr Mahlangu proceeded to welcome all the provinces to the national event.

3.    Presentation of the Consolidated Oversight report by committees

Mr T S Setona, House Chairperson  in  the  National  Council  of  Provinces,
presented a consolidated committees’ report on the oversight  visit  to  the
Bushbuckridge municipality. He highlighted that an  impression  was  created
that the demarcation disputes which bedevilled the area for  some  time  had
immensely affected service delivery by government.

Some services had collapsed since the municipality had been taken back  from
Limpopo. As a result of unfinished projects there was a  huge  shortage  of,
for example, running  water  in  the  Bushbuckridge  area  and  consequently
health services centres such as hospitals  and  clinics  were  affected.  He
urged that this matter be attended to immediately.

He observed that some provincial  departments  had  not  been  part  of  the
oversight visits and senior officials from these departments  had  also  not
been part of the process.

The full report would be presented to Parliament for further  consideration.




4.    Report back by commissions

4.1   Commission one: Sustainable development

Chairperson: Mr K O Bapela, MP, House Chairperson National Assembly

Councillor A Khoza presented a report  on  behalf  of  the  commission.  The
following were some of the inputs made from the floor:

    • Although the environment is important, the education system  does  not
      provide education on the environment and sustainable development.

    • Often sustainable development is interpreted in a way  that  restricts
      development,  especially  of  people  in  rural  areas  who  are  more
      dependent on natural resources.

    • People who continue to plough in  wetlands  should  be  provided  with
      alternative land.

    • Sustainable development should not hamper  communities’  endeavour  to
      develop themselves.

    • Aquatic live stock must be looked after as  some  of  them  are  being
      wiped out by factors such as global warming.

The following responses were received:

    • The education curriculum does include education about the environment.
      However, the government still needs to do more to educate  communities
      about sustainable development, including ways of saving energy,  water
      and other resources.

    • The government realises that climate change presents both threats  and
      opportunities. Communities have to find new ways  of  using  resources
      and create new resources such as renewable sources of energy.

    • Some projects have not been continued because of  transborder  issues.
      There was a disjuncture when Bushbuckridge moved from Limpopo Province
      to Mpumalanga. However, the Mpumalanga government is  working  towards
      ensuring that important projects are continued.

4.2   Commission two: Role of the public in poverty eradication

Chairperson: Mr M B Skosana, MP, House Chairperson in the National  Assembly


Councillor  R  Khumalo  reported  back  on   behalf   of   the   commission.
Participants made the following inputs:

    • Public servants do not respect the Batho Pele principles.

    • The Umsobomvu Youth Fund is not responsive enough to the needs of  the
      youth.

    • There are no proper support structures in  rural  areas  for  disabled
      people to articulate their needs. Some are still not  benefiting  from
      government services due to services not being user-friendly.

    • The government should establish special programmes and enough  support
      structures for widows to earn a living. At present, widows  appear  to
      be sidelined by government.

    • The  authorities  should  process  applications  for  mining  licenses
      speedily.

    • Sustainability of  established  projects  and  provision  of  adequate
      resources to run them should be prioritised.

The following responses were received:

    • There seems to be an information gap, people do not know what services
      are offered and how to access them. Parliamentarians should take steps
      to fill the gap.

    • Early childhood development centers provide  an  opportunity  for  job
      creation for adults who run the centers.

    • The youth should be encouraged to take up agriculture and  farming  as
      career options.

4.3   Commission  three:  The  role  of  education  and  health  in  poverty
     eradication

Chairperson: Mr G Q M Doidge, MP, House Chairperson in the National
Assembly


4.3.1 The role of education in poverty eradication

Mr R P Z van den Heever, MP, reported back on behalf of  the  commission  on
its discussions of  the  education  sub-topic.  The  participants  made  the
following inputs:

    • Existing laws should be enforced  and  parents  held  accountable  for
      their children leaving school early.

    • Schools should implement vocational guidance or training.

    • The poor still lag behind in literacy and acquisition of skills.

    • Nkomzi should be declared a no-fee school zone.

    •  Government  schools  situated  in  rural  areas  must  include  sport
      activities  in  their  academic  curriculum.  Currently  learners  are
      excluded from participation in extramural activities.

    • There is a proliferation of taverns next to school premises  and  this
      leads to drug and alcohol abuse by school pupils.

    • Accessibility for disabled students  at  tertiary  institutions  is  a
      problem.

    • The Department of Education must  as  soon  as  possible  fulfill  its
      promise that each province will be given a director for agriculture in
      schools.

These were some of the responses:

    • The provinces are responsible for the implementation of the  education
      budget. The National Department has decided that some  schools  should
      be no-fee schools, the provincial departments  should  implement  that
      decision.

    • Disabled learners should have full access in schools.

    • Tertiary institutions should be accessible to disabled students.

    •  Statistics  do  not  support  the  claims  that  graduates  are   not
      employable.

4.3.2 The role of health in poverty eradication

Ms F Mazibuko, MP,  reported  back  on  behalf  of  the  commission  on  its
discussion of the health sub-topic. The following were some  of  the  inputs
made:

    • There was a general consensus that  the  lack  of  resources  such  as
      ambulances, furniture and stationery in rural clinics and shortage  of
      staff  such  as  nurses  and  doctors  resulted  in  overcrowding  and
      inadequate services. As a result some patients are turned back without
      help.

    • Vacant posts had been left unfilled for quite some time.

    • There was concern that senior citizens were being  abused  emotionally
      and financially with little being done by government to protect  them.
      Communities must be involved in the creation of safe  havens  for  the
      aged.

5.    Way forward

Chairperson: Mr G  Q  M  Doidge,  MP,  House  Chairperson  in  the  National
Assembly

There was consensus that in the future, public participation processes  such
as the People’s Assembly must be devoted to ordinary people  so  that  there
would be more time for  public  representatives  to  listen  to  the  issues
affecting  communities.  Members  of  Parliament   should   minimise   their
contributions and allow the public more time  to  raise  the  challenges  in
their communities.

Provincial  and  local  structures  of  government  must  also  be  actively
involved so that they are able to  accommodate  community  concerns  in  the
programmes at provincial level.

In its outreach  and  public  participation  programmes,  Parliament  should
endeavour to bridge the information gap by bringing all government  agencies
to engage with the people.

6.    Closing remarks

Mr M J Mahlangu, the Chairperson of the NCOP thanked  all  participants  for
taking  part  in  the  2008  People’s  Assembly.  He   emphasised   that   a
consolidated report of the People’s Assembly  would  be  prepared  and  once
considered by Parliament would be  sent  to  both  National  and  Provincial
governments  for  consideration  of  all  issues  raised.  All  members   of
Parliament and members of provincial legislatures must play a  crucial  role
in implementing and monitoring the implementation of progress  and  projects
on the ground. Parliament  should  consider  reviewing  the  future  of  the
People’s Assembly so as to increase time to fully process  the  issues  that
have been raised.




