---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 March 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-03-19
---

WEDNESDAY, 19 MARCH 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Acting Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I would like to
welcome the Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa to the House
today. Thank you, Deputy President, for being here with us. You are
welcome. I have been informed that the Whippery has agreed that there will
be no notices of motion or motions without notice today, except for the
motion printed on the Order Paper.

                                 NO MOTIONS

We will now proceed with the questions as printed on the Question Paper
and, before we proceed, I wish to inform you that the time for asking
supplementary questions to the Deputy President will be two minutes, time
for replying to supplementary questions will be four minutes, and only four
supplementary questions will be allowed per question.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

             Cabinet discussion on impact of rising fuel prices

1.    Mrs A N D Qikani (UDM) asked the Deputy President:

     Whether Cabinet has discussed the impact of rising fuel prices, with
     particular reference to the impact on household expenditure for the
     working class and the poor in terms of rising transport and food costs;
     if not, why not; if so, what recommendations were considered to (a)
     provide relief to such households in the short term and (b) revamp the
     regressive taxes and over-regulated industrial scheme that underpins
     fuel prices at present?
     CO1046E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Acting Chair, the question is on the rising
cost of fuel prices, as well as household expenditure and its impact on
working-class people.

Hon members, Cabinet members have been discussing the impact of rising food
and transport costs on household budgets in the context the recently
released Income and Expenditure Survey 2005-06 of Statistics South Africa.
More recently, the issue of rising food prices was also discussed – even
today – by Cabinet at length.
The survey that was conducted by Statistics South Africa shows that, for
the bottom four income deciles, food accounts for about 30% of household
expenditure and transport for 11%. This means that over 40% of the
household expenditure of the poorest 40% of the population is spent on
transport and food, a figure which is clearly very high.

Any increase in the prices of these goods has always been a concern to
government. After the steep increases in food prices in 2001-02, hon
members will remember that government formed a food price monitoring
committee to look into this matter and to monitor any untoward behaviour.
This monitoring committee reports to the Minister for Agriculture and Land
Affairs, who has the responsibility to apprise Cabinet on these issues.

In the light of the current situation, we have, therefore, asked the
Ministry for Agriculture and Land Affairs to engage in further
consultations so that it can make recommendations to Cabinet about possible
interventions. At that time, hon members, we will hear about the
announcement when the Minister or Cabinet makes it.

On the question of pricing of liquid fuels, I would like to remind the
House that the government restructured the pricing of liquid fuels in 2003
with the introduction of the basic fuel price formula. It is estimated that
this pricing formula has saved motorists over R1 billion per annum since
its introduction. The fuel tax has had a relatively small impact on the
recent price increase because, as hon Basil Douglas would know, that is a
very small percentage of the petrol price.

The tax also has a social role in that it internalises some of the social
costs of using liquid fuel-driven vehicles. However, as fuel prices are
determined internationally and we import the majority of our liquid fuels,
we do not have a great deal of control and leverage that could really help
us reduce the impact on the consumers.

Let me assure the hon member that we are closely monitoring all the
economic indicators. Our quest for higher rates of growth called upon us to
balance the macroeconomic imperatives with the sustained fight against
poverty. But we must also be realistic. There are a number of variables
that fall outside our control as the South African government and, indeed,
the people of the Republic. Thank you.

 Number of youths trained through Jipsa, and criteria used to identify them

2.    Ms H F Matlanyane (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


     (1)    What (a) is the total number of youths receiving training
           through the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition,
           Jipsa, in each province and (b) are the criteria used to
           identify young people that are allocated to the programme;


     (2)    whether such criteria take into consideration young people in
           rural and farm areas; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                                  CO1061E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, Acting Chairperson and hon member for this
question that deals with the issue of skills and the Joint Initiative for
Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa. To respond appropriately to this
question raised by the hon Matlanyane, I just need, again, to restate that
Jipsa is a specific initiative within government’s wider Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa.

Jipsa is a very small part of the work that government does in education.
It is aimed at addressing the issue of binding constraints, in particular
the issue of the shortage of critical skills. So, it doesn’t deal with all
the skills nor does it deal with all the aspects of education. It deals
with these in relation to those skills that are more directly needed for
growth.

In the interim and with the high skills demand in the country, we have
undertaken various initiatives to increase the access to these skills to
young people and, in particular, to ensure that they can access high
quality skills. One of the biggest initiatives in this regard that we have
supported with the Department of Education, which is leading that
initiative, is the transformation and the recapitalisation of the Further
Education and Training, FET, sector. The work that was done by Jipsa
together with the Department of Education showed that there was a
significant need for skills that the FETs can provide.

So, there has been a positive response on the part of government. Many of
you are aware of FET colleges in the areas that you live in. There’s also a
bursary scheme of R600 million over a three-year period, which will also,
for the first time, enable those young people who go to FET colleges to
also have access to our bursary scheme.

The latest Department of Labour figures also reflect that there has been an
increase in the training of artisans. As you know, again, in Asgisa, we
identified artisanal skills as crucial skills.

In the year 2007-08, a service level agreement that was signed between the
various Sector Education and Training Authorities or Setas, and the
Department of Labour reflected that there were 18 879 artisans that were to
be registered for training. We expect that number to grow because more
Setas have come on board and we hope that between 2008 and 2009 the figure
will reach 20 000. We have been able to put a lot of pressure on and
generate encouragement for greater support for this type of training, as
required in Jipsa and Asgisa. We have also been able to point out what the
barriers to training and producing artisans are in South Africa, and that
has led to the amendment of the law, which will ensure that we can produce
artisans in South Africa through different means, such as learnerships,
FETs, apprenticeships in the workplace and the training that can be
supported by employers of unemployed people. That is how we are going to
see an increase.

I must also say that there are certain provinces, as well as companies that
have gone out of their way to do their own training. We don’t necessarily
have those figures but we encourage them to do that. One such province
would be the Western Cape. The business commitment to supporting the
training of artisans, technicians and technologists and to provide
workplace experience to those who are not yet in employment is also a clear
undertaking that has arisen out of the work of Jipsa.

This initiative is led by Business Leadership SA at a chief executive
officer level and they are committing themselves by taking on the issue of
human capital at a strategic level within each company in the same way that
they view finance, information technology, IT, etc., so that the person
responsible for human resources in a company is not someone who is sitting
there in the corner. The CEO of a company also has to answer on the human
resources development. This has happened because we have brought the CEOs
into Jipsa and we requested them to make some commitments. They have a five-
year plan and I think at the beginning of the year when the report is
available, we will share with you the report of the impact that they would
be making.

We have also undertaken training in Jipsa through the placement programme.
In that regard we take on unemployed graduates or recently graduated
students as well as mid-level career professionals. The aim there is to
fast-track experience acquisition. I must say that a number of companies
have come on board and offered us the opportunity for placement in a
programme that is being co-ordinated by the Independent Development Trust,
IDT, and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund. For example, 80 accounting trainees,
between 2006 and 2008, have been taken on board by KPMG.

Now, many of these are rural, young people who are unemployed with BCom or
finance-related degrees who then end up as waiters. The fact that some of
them are going to end up as accountants and chartered accountants, CAs, is
something that is very encouraging, and, of course, this company has also
advertised to take more trainees in the programme that they call the KPMG
Growth Acceleration Programme.

We’ve also been advertising in the press and the City Press in particular
has played a very important role in assisting us to advertise. We have
worked with the provinces to recruit some of these young people so that we
can spread the benefits throughout the country, because we have noticed
that the rural students are not coming on board. Limpopo in particular has
been very active in assisting us to recruit students from that province.

As we speak, for instance, we have just sent young graduates to the
Netherlands for various kinds of training and different types of skills
acquisition, all of which are scarce skills. We’ve graduates in India
mainly in the information and communication technology, ICT, sector but
also in the engineering and built environment spread across all corners of
India. I must also highlight the fact that we also faced challenges because
many of these students find themselves all by themselves in one corner of
that very big country. Sometimes they get homesick and it can get very
complicated. We’ve had a total of three students who had to come back
because they just couldn’t cope, but the majority of the students – of
which there are now almost 1000 - have been able to settle very well and
they have begun to come back because they have completed their training.

So, there’s a total number of 20 000 young graduates who have been placed
nationally and internationally through this programme. The companies such
as Microsoft, Eskom and Shoprite here at home and computer companies, such
as Satyam in India, have taken these young people under their wing and, of
course, the latest group is the one that has gone to the Netherlands.

The Department of Public Service and Administration, DPSA, has also done
excellent work in relation to municipalities and they have been placing, in
particular, experienced and retired persons to support and mentor young
professionals and assist the municipalities with their delivery. They are
now placed in 101 municipalities, which makes it a total of 118
professionals and experts.

We are also continuing with the work of removing some of the obstacles to
training, which include taking some of our recruitment programmes to the
rural areas. The numbers are not yet satisfactory but we are very much
conscious of that. Some of the areas – for your information, hon members –
that we are going to be focusing on, as per our priorities in Asgisa in
addition to artisans and engineers, would include, for instance, planners
in municipalities and ensuring that we have an appropriate curriculum to
train people in those skills. We are focusing on teachers, especially the
ICT, language, maths and science teachers. We are also focusing on health
personnel, especially health managers.

These programmes are unfolding and when we have figures on the intake, we
would also be in a position to apprise you. However, I must emphasise that
the numbers do not depend on what we do and push for,  as the Jipsa
Secretariat; it depends on us encouraging other people to do the training,
and some people have never even come back to tell us what they have been
able to do and successes that they have had. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Acting Chairperson and hon Deputy
President, my supplementary question is on the allocation of the R600
million for the bursaries, funded over three years. According to my
observations, there seems to be a general lack of knowledge and information
on the part of learners who are supposed to be accessing these bursaries in
terms of where they are and how they can apply. Now, I want to check
whether any integrated strategy is being used by government, in particular
through the Department of Education, to communicate information about these
bursaries to our learners in their respective schools. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Acting Chairperson and hon member, yes, the
Department of Education does advertise and share information but I’m sure
we can always do much more than we are doing now. Generally, students
always know where to find money and who has the money, but it is also true
that first-year students who may be outside the tertiary institutions may
not know where to start. So, clearly, part of our advertising strategy has
got to be at a high school level so that, when they pass, they know exactly
where to apply and I will carry that message back to the department.

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Acting Chairperson and hon Deputy President, my follow-
up question will be as follows: I’m satisfied that our approach in dealing
with issues of the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa,
assumes a national character and, of course, Deputy President, it takes all
of us in this House and all of us as members to ensure that the spirit of
the people’s contract that the ANC has committed itself to in ensuring that
we participate in this type of initiative is carried forward, and that we
ensure that the programme is a success. It is also the responsibility of
all the members to ensure that this becomes a success more especially for
those of us who are coming from the rural areas. I thank you very much and
I would request the Acting Chairperson that the answers be forwarded in
writing to me.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): So, you don’t need
to respond, hon Deputy President. You may do it in writing.

      Bias in allocation of resources towards areas and provinces with
                          presidential nodal points

3.    Ms H F Matlanyane (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


     Whether there are any indications of bias in the allocation of
     resources towards areas and provinces that have presidential nodal
     points in order to meet their service delivery needs; if so, (a) what
     are the relevant details of the allocation to be made to the Sekhukhune
     region and (b) when will such allocation be made?
                             CO1062E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, again this question is from hon
Matlanyane. Hon member, as you might be aware, the nodal points were
selected in 2001, on the basis of having a higher-than-average poverty
level in the country.

In the case of the rural nodes, the nodal programme was targeted at
district level. It should be noted that the local municipalities within
these districts are among the most underresourced councils compared to the
rest; I think they were at the time, because we have now improved their
resources. Some of these municipalities are also amongst the youngest
institutions to be established after the local government demarcation
process.

National sector departments have indicated in their business plans how they
plan to contribute towards the broader development of nodal points. Since
2003, there has been an increase in the number of departments that have
indicated their support and contribution to the nodes. At national level,
we use the cluster system to encourage integrated planning, co-ordination
and monitoring as well as implementation within a node.

As a mechanism to boost our support to these areas, nodal municipalities
receive an additional 5% of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant allocation
by virtue of being nodes.

So, in addition to all the departments co-ordinating for delivery in these
nodes, nodes also get an additional 5% of the Municipal Infrastructure
Grant.
The 5% allocation for the 2008-09 financial year is estimated at R433
million. Furthermore, the bias towards the nodes is clearly demonstrated in
the institutional mechanisms that have been set up to provide support to
the nodes in a way that perhaps other programmes may not have.

The Integrated Strategy for Rural Development and the integrated
development plans are also supported by what we call “political and
technical champions”, who are national Ministers, provincial MECs, mayors
and municipal managers. These ensure that there is a way of rallying the
three spheres of government around a node in pursuit of a common agenda.

At provincial level, there is the premiers’ planning forum, which is a
technical structure consisting of representatives of all sector departments
and the Premiers Co-ordinating Forum - a political structure consisting of
MECs and mayors. In the Eastern Cape and Free State provinces, they have
even established strong interdepartmental task teams consisting of these
sector departments.

In addition to the establishment of these intergovernmental co-ordinating
mechanisms, the nodes have witnessed the involvement of Business Trust,
which brings together representatives of the private sector as partners.
Also involved is the Independent Development Trust, which has been there
for quite some time. Of course, there are also the international
development agencies, such as the GTZ, which has offered critical support
in these areas, as indicated.

Not many other programmes have enjoyed such support and bias. However, one
might ask: What are the results of our involvement in the nodes? Evidence
is abundant. For example, there has been an increased awareness on the part
of people about where and how to access government services in the nodes.
There is also greater participation in the different stakeholder forums
that address issues of development.

Several studies and community engagement sessions conducted in the nodal
areas in the current financial year have come to the same conclusion, even
with the uptake in the delivery of service, that there is an improvement in
both service delivery and the lives of the citizens living in the nodes.
This does not mean that they are in a better position than other rural
areas, but, clearly, if we had not made this concerted effort, they would
have been even worse off.

In the case of the rural nodes, more than 2 913 households have benefited
from services provided by the MIG funding in the six nodes that were part
of the study. Of course, I have a lot of figures here. I think I will
treble the time it requires to answer the question if I were to read all of
them. So, I will just submit the figures for the benefit of hon members.

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is responsible for the
implementation of sanitation, water, rudimentary and bulk schemes, bulk
scheme refurbishment, fire prevention, and forestry and water resource
improvement projects in the respective nodes. Of course, the same is being
done by the Minerals and Energy department. In all of this the Department
of Provincial and Local Government is a co-ordinator.

Actually, you’ll find that, in the nodes, universal access to some of the
basic services is higher, and therefore there’s a good chance that we’ll
reach universal service much earlier in these areas than in the others.

The hon member also wanted to know exactly what was happening in
Sekhukhune. Up to 30 September 2006, there were 75 housing projects in
Sekhukhune, comprising 26 429 planned units. The approved projects will now
benefit 17 069 people. The total budget for the project was R601 449 ... I
can’t read this figure.

The school nutrition programme, also in this particular node, has increased
quite significantly, but the same has also happened in the Eastern Cape,
KwaZulu-Natal, Northern Cape and North West.

In the Sekhukhune area, in particular, the schools have benefited quite
significantly. There are 669 schools that have benefited
221 110 learners.
In all the rural nodes, between 2005 and 2006, the number of people who
received social grants increased by 13%. Again, this is also quite
significant. There is a report here from the Premier of Limpopo, which
gives a breakdown of what has happened in the Sekhukhune area. I think that
the figures are just too much for me to read, so I’d like to table the
document.

As you can see, hon member, the document is quite thick. However, it gives
you a lot of details about the Sekhukhune area. I can see that the hon
member has quite an interest in and is passionate about that constituency.
However, needless to say, it still remains a poor area, and we have to
continue to do the work there.

Another impressive intervention in relation to the nodes has been the work
of CDWs, that is, the community development workers. We have been able to
meet our target of deploying 10 CDWs per municipality in the nodal areas,
and we are beginning to see the impact of these CDWs. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Chairperson, I thank the hon Deputy
President for the reply. I would like to check whether we have timeframes,
or are these areas going to be nodal points forever? Are there timeframes
and key performance indicators, on the basis of which, at some point in our
evolving democracy, we will be able to say that we have achieved what we
set out to achieve through these development initiatives in the nodal
points? Thank you.
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: This is a difficult question, hon member. It’s like
asking when we will end affirmative action. As long as these communities
remain significantly disadvantaged, you cannot really pull out of them.
However, I think that some of the key performance indicators would be the
national indicators.

For instance, when there’s universal access to water, universal access to
electricity, when we have improved significantly the condition of the
roads, and so on, in accordance with and in line with the national targets,
then we would have brought these nodes to the same level as other areas
that we are developing throughout the country. So, it’s difficult to put
timeframes on this because, as I’m saying, it’s just like the affirmative
action argument.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Chairperson, maybe I should
contextualise my question. I accept your explanation, hon Deputy President.
One of the reasons we had blazing fires in the Harrismith area, which is
closer to the Phuthaditjhaba and Qwaqwa areas in the Free State, is that
people in that area - as well as in Bethlehem - felt that government no
longer cared about them. They felt that all resources were being taken to
the nodal points. So, I’m raising this question in that particular context.

I do believe that, at some point in our history, we will arrive at a point
where we will say, we have reached equity, and we can no longer talk about
affirmative action. So that is the context in which I asked the question.

I would like to hear your comment on this question, because it is a
sensitive issue there.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I agree with the hon member. We have to
make sure that, as we support the poorest of the poor, we do not
disadvantage other people who may not be as poor, but, clearly, also have a
quality of life that is unenviable.

There are a lot of judgment calls that have to be made by the political and
senior officials in those particular communities. To the extent that you
are raising an issue about the Free State, I think the challenge would be
to sensitise and to engage the leadership in the Free State, to make sure
that we are not understood and seen to be favouring one community over the
other. Definitely, that is not an intended outcome.

  Government’s involvement in verifying South African companies’ compliance
                   with BEE and employment equity policies

4.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

     Whether the Government has been involved in any exercise of verifying
     South African companies for their compliance with the black economic
     empowerment, BEE, and employment equity policies; if not, why not; if
     so, (a) what is the level of compliance by companies and (b) what was
     the annual percentage increase and/or decrease in the participation of
     (i) black women, (ii) the youth and (iii) persons with disabilities in
     senior management structures in the past four years?
      CO1063E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, this question is from the Chief Whip,
who is no longer brand new, the hon Ntwanambi.

The Department of Trade and Industry, in conjunction with the Presidency
and the Presidential Black Business Working Group, prepared a Broad-based
Black Economic Empowerment or BBBEE progress report in 2007. This baseline
national survey was designed to verify compliance with the implementation
of Broad-based Economic Empowerment or BEE in the economy. The report was
the first initiative that government undertook for the verification of
BBBEE compliance since the gazetting of the Codes of Good Practice in
February 2007. The verification of compliance is to be carried out on an
annual basis and it will be located within the soon-to-be established
presidential advisory council. This is the intention as we go forward.

But, with regard to reports that have already been issued, compliance in
relation to issues of equity and ownership ranges from 30 to 40 points out
of a total of 100 points. Relatively speaking, in terms of the other
points, you could say this is better, even though it is still below 50%.
Therefore, we have to be concerned. Performance with regard to employment
equity is even less impressive. According to the Department of Labour, the
proportion of black people in senior, middle and junior management
positions stands at 36,7%. With respect to executive management, including
white women, compliance is at 32,4%.

Even more disappointing, according to the Department of Labour’s Commission
for Employment Equity Report of 2006-07, black females at top management
level represent only 6,6%; at senior management, they represent only 8%; at
middle management, they represent 13,8% and, at lower management, they
represent 14,1%. At top management level, disabled people represent only
1,4%; at senior management, representation is as small as 0,7%, and at
middle management they represent 0,5%. The youth are assumed to be
beneficiaries of middle and junior management development since these
levels present entry points and upward movement opportunities for younger
members of our labour market who are likely to be relatively more educated
than the older people. The numbers are, however, unknown because
measurement by age group has not been done.

Another study that was commissioned by the President in 2006 showed that
the private sector largely supports the development of the youth and people
with disability through employment equity and skills development. This
trend is being monitored for growth and the quality of outcome. The figures
provided in the survey only cover the recent period - 2006 and 2007. Most
statistics reflecting previous years are not reliable and therefore we
couldn’t use them.

Government is under no illusion that all is well in this area. We need to
do more work. We also know that this is very much a contested area and that
we also experience tokenism, fronting, etc. Therefore, we need to make sure
that we win companies over so that, when they implement this, they really
do their best, and not just do it so that they can get us out of their
faces. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Deputy
President, I know you have a passion for this one, and that is why I will
do a follow-up question.

Empowerdex, which is one of the reputable research organisations on black
economic empowerment compliance in our country that compiles data on BEE,
indicates that although there has been much progress on women
representation in government, women in the private sector are still faced
with major challenges, and the private sector has not shown any real signs
of transformation in terms of gender. This is also reflected in terms of
salaries and the gender pay gap across government and business, which is
24,6%. This puts this country at the less transformed end of the scale with
Paraguay and reasserts that the private sector is still a male-dominated
terrain.

Persons with disabilities, particularly women with disabilities, are the
most disadvantaged. Therefore, Deputy President, what measures does
government intend to put in place to ensure that this issue is indeed
addressed, because, clearly, I know you can’t simply monitor compliance and
do nothing?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, as you are aware, there is a scorecard
that has been adopted by DTI that introduces, amongst others, sanctions for
companies for noncompliance. So, it is through that scorecard that we are
actually going to monitor compliance. But I even think that a certain
degree of activism on our part is actually quite important. Many companies
do not like to be put in the public light as being underperforming or
untransformed and nonprogressive.

The issue of gender pay parity is of even greater concern. This is actually
denying women equal pay for equal work. It is a human rights issue. I think
we should look at different ways of engaging in it. The hon member would be
aware that we are also looking at the functioning of our gender machinery
with the aim of strengthening it so that we do not only depend on what we
can do with the codes. In general we also should have the population as
well as gender activists take up these issues. We have more and more
organised women in business. We hope that they will also be able to assist
us.

This is the same on the issue of persons with disability. We have, in fact,
been asked to look at how we can actually strengthen the policy as it
stands with regard to people with disability. Based on what we have done up
to thus far, we all feel that we have underperformed. Government feels we
have underperformed. We have pockets of good performance. For instance,
Limpopo is one province that has done very well. But, in general, we don’t
think that we are doing very well. So, we are looking at different measures
and we have asked hon members to also contribute.

I have also noted that there are certain areas in the Joint Initiative on
Priority Skills Acquisition where it is easier to recruit, for instance,
people with disabilities. Therefore, we will try to have a bias towards
people with disabilities in those areas and hope that we will increase the
uptake and the numbers of people we can bring in.

I have to say to the members that, recently, I went to visit a school for
deaf children. The school starts from Grade R and goes up to Grade 12. One
of the things I found quite remarkable about the school was, firstly, the
passion and the commitment of the teachers and the fact that for those
children to acquire those skills, they go through so much. For us not to
employ them at the end when they exit school is quite discouraging, even to
the teachers who have put in so much time. What was even more disturbing
was to see that a significant number of the children had more than one
disability. This means that the fact that they are there at school with
more than one disability and are progressing is a reflection of the effort
that is put into that by us as a society. Therefore, we have a
responsibility to give them a chance once they have completed their
schooling. Thank you.

Mr D D GAMEDE: Thank you, Deputy Chair and hon Deputy President. This is
just a follow-up on the issue of disability equity. How do we enforce the
implementation of disability equity as government departments as opposed to
the private sector? It might be a little bit of a challenge in the private
sector. We, as government departments, are the ones who make these laws and
are supposed to implement them. How do we really monitor that and actually
enforce that? Thanks.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I think we do need some sanctions, sanctions that
will ensure that if people cannot even demonstrate that they have made an
effort, then there should be some consequences for the lack of effort. But
we also have to encourage and reward those who have excelled so that we are
not only punitive, but also contribute towards giving people incentives for
people to do better.

In the process of revising the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework
Act, we came across a lot of issues – including the fact that we just need
to balance punitive measures and incentives in order to make sure that we
increase the uptake. So, I would say, in short, that we do need some
sanctions, even in government.

Mr W M DOUGLAS: Chairperson and hon Deputy President, I would like to know
whether government has identified, through its verification processes,
continued discrimination against specifically the coloured population? This
is a prevailing perception in my constituency of various companies and
their HR employment practices, as well as a growing problem in corporate
South Africa. If you have not, why not; and if so, what is being done to
rectify the problem or to correct the perception within the communities?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, firstly, this is not a follow-up
question, hon member, but I think the question is important. We need you to
help us correct that perception, because it is not accurate. There is
nothing like that. If people cannot produce facts attesting to that ... In
fact, the figures speak for themselves. If you just go to the statistics on
employment equity, you’ll see that the people that are at the bottom of the
pile are African women – period. So there is nothing like a number to tell
the truth, but this is an important sector of our community, so you need to
help us to engage with them, especially if you are a leader there, because
it is your constituency. So it’s you and me, member.

     Monitoring by the Presidency of the implementation of preferential
                     procurement policy and legislation
5.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the Presidency has been monitoring the implementation of
           the preferential procurement policy and legislation by all
           spheres of government in so far as it should benefit women, the
           youth and people with disabilities; if not, why not; if so, what
           are the relevant details for the past financial year;


      (2)   whether she will make a statement on the matter?   CO1064E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, this is again a question from the hon
Chief Whip. In 2002, government promulgated the Preferential Procurement
Policy Framework Act. The Act gives effect to section 217 2(b) of the
Constitution, which is intended to ensure that the procurement of goods and
services by government leads to the protection and advancement of
vulnerable and previously disadvantaged persons. The Act thus obligates all
spheres of government to pursue empowerment of such persons through
implementation of preferential procurement policies.

The measures that we have used to follow up and to evaluate are not
accurate to enable us to generate the reliable information that the member
may be seeking. It must also be stated that effective monitoring can only
succeed once the disparate financial systems across national and provincial
governments are integrated into a single system. We still have that discord
that we don’t have one system, so my answer will not give you what you
could regard as a scientific answer, but it gives you an approximation.

There are some positive developments. For example, in 2004, the National
Treasury did develop an electronic reporting mechanism to capture details
in all contracts in excess of R100 000 awarded by national departments. The
information captured in the attached schedule, which will be tabled, has
been extracted from the database for each of the last four financial years
and provides the following information from the total value of contracts
awarded to total value of contracts awarded to black people, that is, the
businesses that are owned by those people. It must also be noted that
information is therefore based on unaudited figures, so you must then take
it with a pinch of salt, even though it does give you an indication. The
values are in respect of contracts awarded and not actual expenditure on
the contracts. The statistics also exclude Information and Communication
Technology, ICT, contracts awarded by the State Information Technology
Agency, Sita, because they account outside this framework.

I have attached some figures for you, but as I said, you wanted to know if
we are doing that. We are doing it, but it is not perfect. Once we have
finished the integration and once the civil service process has been
completed, then we will be in a better position to evaluate all of this.
Thank you.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson and Deputy President, one of the
biggest challenges that South Africa is facing is the fronting of black
economic empowerment, BEE, companies, which mostly affects people in the
provinces and municipalities. This makes it necessary to ensure that any
contract obtained through fronting should be considered to have been
fraudulently acquired and punishable by law. However, if we do not have
proper structures that will evaluate and assess all government procurement
transactions, we will not be able to address this problem. Therefore,
Deputy President, what measures has government put in place to do quality
control of all its procurement transactions in order to eliminate the
problem of fronting, particularly in our provinces and municipalities,
where our people are used by people that should not benefit from our
preferential procurement policies, who get millions of rands for the deals
and pay people peanuts? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon member, even though the monitoring
is not perfect at this point in time, it does not mean that we cannot
detect and act on fronting. We do not exactly have a law on fronting, but
if people obtain a contract through false representation, the normal law
has to take its course, because misrepresentation of information is
misrepresentation of information, regardless. That includes
disqualification, blacklisting by the department and, in some cases, we can
also institute a penalty, but we do not have a law that is specific on
that.
In the codes, it is much tighter. In the black economic empowerment codes,
because we are trying to have clarity for ourselves and for the companies
about how you assign points to a company, one of the culprits that would
need to be punished is even the company that is awarding the points,
because then it will not get the points that it is supposed to have gotten
if it had complied with the BEE requirements.

You may be aware, hon member, that the Act is being amended. It is going to
come back and I think these are some of the areas that you would also need
to pay attention to to make sure that we have addressed that as well in the
amending Act.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Chairperson and hon Deputy
President, I am quite sure you are aware of a claim within the public
domain by the Black Management Forum that this Preferential Procurement
Policy Framework Act that we have is actually impacting negatively on what
it is supposed to produce. They argue that it actually excludes the very
historically disadvantaged individuals that it is intended to affirm within
the mainstream economy.

Leaving the Black Management Forum, when you go to izimbizo and you meet in
public hearings, quite a number of emerging businesspeople in our own
communities are actually making some of these claims. Therefore, my
question would be: Isn’t is appropriate that, at some point, we need to
pause and do an impact study on this particular legislation and other
related legislation such as like your Construction Industry Development
Board, so that we have a scientific grasp of the impact on our communities?
Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, yes, hon member, that is why we are now
also amending the Act. Its purpose is to respond to some of those issues,
some of which have also been raised by ourselves. The concern there is
really that the points that are awarded for price and other requirements
are much more substantive than the points you get for complying with BEE.
The tension there, however, which we must watch, is how you achieve a
balance, ensuring that you have an economy that does not inflate the price
and therefore make BEE much more expensive to government and to the economy
but, at the same time, you also bring people in. That is why, in some
cases, we encourage joint ventures, because I would suppose that when black
people put their prices up, it is because they do not enjoy economies of
scale, so they are unable absorb the losses in the way in which the big
companies can.

There is something bigger in the economy that needs to happen in order for
us to achieve a balance. We don’t want to precipitate inflation in the
economy, and high costs of products, which are already very high. If you
take construction, for instance, the cost of capital goods in construction
is getting higher and higher, so we don’t want to price it higher, but that
must not mean that we are punishing black people. I don’t claim to have the
answer. I think that, through the amendment, we are trying to address some
of these key imbalances.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Any other follow-up
questions to the Deputy President? If there is none, then that concludes
the questions to the Deputy President. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Deputy President for participating in the debate
and for her comprehensive input to the questions. Thank you very much, hon
Deputy President.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES

         JOINT PRESIDENTIAL AND PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS IN ZIMBABWE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Acting Chairperson, on behalf of
the Chairperson of the Council, I move the draft resolution printed in his
name on the Order Paper, as follows:

  That the House, noting that Zimbabwe is holding joint presidential and
  parliamentary elections on 29 March 2008, resolves, subject to the
  concurrence of the National Assembly, that-

     1) the South African Parliament send a 15-member multiparty delegation
        to observe these elections;


  (2) the delegation form part of the SADC observer mission;


  (3) the delegation observe the campaign in the run-up to the elections,
        the casting of votes and subsequently the counting of the votes; and




  (4) the delegation presents the mission’s report to Parliament on its
        return.


The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to
cast their province’s votes. Are all the delegation heads present? Are they
all present?

I shall now also allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations
in terms of Rule 71 if they so wish. Is there any province wishing to make
any declaration of vote? There is obviously none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: In favour.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ha yi seketela. [We support it.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Ondersteun. [We support.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Re a e dumela. [We support.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All provinces voted
in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of section 65
of the Constitution.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF THE RULES COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL
                            COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

Order disposed of without debate.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their province’s votes. Are all the delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. The delegation heads must please indicate
to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyayixhasa. [We support.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Supports.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ya yi seketela. [Limpopo supports it.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Supports.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: I said Mpumalanga supports, Deputy Chairperson.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Ke a rona. [Supports.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Re a dumela. [We support.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All provinces voted
in favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Before the next Order, the Secretary will read the Second Order of the day.
I’m leaving the Chair now because I’ve got something else to do.

I would like to express our deepest sympathy to the hon Douglas on the
passing away of his father, and we hope that he accepts our sympathies.
Thank you very much.

  CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE, 2007 - ORDER IN
                     JOINT SITTINGS AND RULES OF DEBATE

Order disposed of without debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their province’s
votes. Are all the delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish.
We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyayixasa. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ya yi seketela. [Limpopo supports it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Siyavuma. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Re a dumela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): All provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE, 2008 - MULTIPARTY
     WOMEN'S CAUCUS, LANGUAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR BILLS AND JOINT STANDING
                          COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE

Order disposed of without debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution. I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s votes. Are all the delegation heads
present?

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyayixhasa. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ya yi seketela. [Supports it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga ondersteun. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Re a dumela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): All provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                        GOOD WISHES FOR EASTER PERIOD

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon members, I know that it is
our last sitting today. So, you will be leaving for your provinces for the
Easter weekend. I just want to say that I wish you well and we must all go
to church on the Easter weekend and we must be with our families on Family
Day.

The Council adjourned at 15:05.
                                  _________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           TUESDAY, 18 MARCH 2008


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (a)    Business Plan of the Agricultural Research Council for 2008-2009
         [RP 29-2008].
 2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Report of the South African Law Reform  Commission  on  Domestic
         Partnerships (Project 118, March 2006) [RP 136-2007].


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs  on
   the International Agreement establishing the  Africa  Institute  for  the
   Environmentally Sound Management of Hazardous and other Waste,  dated  18
   March 2008:


   The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having considered
   the    request for approval by Parliament of the International  Agreement
   establishing  the  Africa  Institute  for   the   Environmentally   Sound
   Management of Hazardous and other Waste, referred to it, recommends  that
   the Council, in terms  of  section  231(2)  of  the  Constitution,  1996,
   approve the said International Agreement.

   Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
   on Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons Bill [B 7B
   – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 11 March 2008, as follows:

   The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
   considered the subject of the Prohibition or Restriction of Certain
   Conventional Weapons Bill [B 7B – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75),
   referred to it, agrees to the Bill with proposed amendments as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 1
1.    On page 4, after line 26, to insert the following definition:
   "non-detectable fragments" means any device or material the primary
   effect of which is to injure by fragments which in the human body escape
   detection by X-rays;

2.    On page 4, after line 44, to insert the following definition:
   "prescribed" means prescribed by regulation made under section 15;


                                  CLAUSE 5
1.    On page 6, from line 4, to omit “weapon” up to and including “X-rays”
   in line 5 and to substitute “non-detectable fragments”.

                                  CLAUSE 9
1.    On page 7, in line 27, after “8” to insert “or who orders or aids the
   the contravention thereof”.

                                  CLAUSE 10
1.    On page 7, in line 33, after “possession” to insert “in the
prescribed manner”.
2.    On page 7, from line 38, to omit subsection (3) and to substitute:
            (3)The police official must record the notification
            contemplated in subsection (1) and immediately arrange for the
            collection of the prohibited weapon or component part.

                                  CLAUSE 11
1.    On page 8, from line 9, to omit paragraph (b) and to substitute:
      (b)   to Parliament before the Minister submits the report
      contemplated in paragraph (a).


                                  CLAUSE 15
1.    On page 8, from line 49, to omit subsection (2) and to substitute:
            (2)Regulations made by the Minister prescribing the matters
          stated in section 10(1) must be made after consultation with the
          Minister for Safety and Security.

2.    On page 9, in line 2, to omit “as soon as possible after publication”
      and to substitute “prior to promulgation”.

                                  CLAUSE 17
1.    On page 9, in line 23, to omit “2007” and to substitute “2008”.


                          WEDNESDAY, 19 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19F – 2006] – Act No 41 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 13 March 2008).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance
         and the Select Committee on Finance.

3.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (a)      Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 14 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)


             Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 77) and
             referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 19
             March 2008.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


         (b)      Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 13 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 30870 of 14 March 2008].
             Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 75) and
             referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 19
             March 2008.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 19 March 2008:


         (a)      Cross-Border Road Transport Amendment Bill [B 51B - 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Public
             Services of the National Council of Provinces.


         (b)      Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2B - 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 76).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
             and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit  of  border
         control at the South African Police Service – January 2008 [RP  10-
         2008].

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Government Notice No 214  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30794 dated 22 February 2008: Determination of  interest  rate  for
         purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of  “official  rate  of
         interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule in  terms  of  the
         Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

    (b)    Government Notice No 216  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30796 dated 22 February 2008:  Fixing  of  rate  per  kilometre  in
         respect of motor vehicles in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act
         No 58 of 1962).

    (c)    Government Notice No R.242 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         30818 dated 27 February  2008:  Amendment  of  Schedule  No  1  (No
         1/2/149) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

    (d)    Government Notice No R.243 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         30818 dated 27 February  2008:  Amendment  of  Schedule  No  1  (No
         1/5/143) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).
    (e)    Government Notice No R.244 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         30818 dated 27 February  2008:  Amendment  of  Schedule  No  1  (No
         1/5/144) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
         1964).

    (f)    Government Notice No R.245 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         30818 dated 27 February 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No  6/12)
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (g)    General Notice No 305 published in Government Gazette  No  30805
         dated  29  February  2008:  Notice   on   proposed   variation   of
         Policyholder Protection Rules (Short-term Insurance)  in  terms  of
         the Short-term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 53 of 1998).

    (h)    Report of the South African Reserve Bank of the  annual  general
         meeting of shareholders for 2007.

 1. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)    Medium Term Strategic Framework of the Department of  Trade  and
         Industry for 2008 to 2011.

     (b)    Government Notice No R.819 published in  Government  Gazette  No
        30254 dated 7 September 2007: Proposed amendment of the  Compulsory
        Specification for Vehicles of Category 03 and 04, in terms  of  the
        Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on  the
    National Gambling Amendment Bill (B 31B – 2007), dated 12 March 2008

    The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having  considered
    the subject of the National Gambling  Amendment  Bill  (B  31B  –  2007)
    referred to it, and classified by  the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a
    section 76 (1) Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B31C-2007].

    Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Division  of  Revenue
    Bill [B 4 – 2008], dated 19 March 2008

       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and  examined  the
       Division of Revenue Bill, [B 4– 2008 (National Assembly – sec 76(1)),
       referred to it, and classified by the JTM as a  section  76(1)  Bill,
       reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


     Report to be considered

