---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 November 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-11-19
---

WEDNESDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

House Chairperson Mr A C Nel took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

              CHARLIZE THERON INDUCTED AS UN MESSENGER OF PEACE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that South African actress Charlize Theron was inducted as a
        United Nations Messenger of Peace on Monday, 17 November 2008;


     2) further notes that she joins only nine other people in becoming a
        messenger for the UN in waging peace and conducting its humanitarian
        work worldwide;

     3) recognizes that growing up in an environment of domestic abuse has
        resulted in her working tirelessly when it comes to fighting
        violence against women and children and addressing the social ills
        of poverty and HIV/Aids that include her working with a Cape Town
        rape crisis centre in 1999 and founding the Charlize Theron Africa
        Outreach Project to promote HIV/Aids education for poor children and
        their families in our country;

     4) acknowledges that both her roles as an Academy Award winning actress
        and as a humanitarian have placed our country in the international
        spotlight and have demonstrated what can be achieved through hard
        work and perseverance irrespective of ones social background; and

     5) congratulates her on this great honour that has been bestowed on her
        and for inspiring all South Africans to reach for their dreams.


Agreed to.

                             CIVIL AVIATION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                             CIVIL AVIATION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson and hon members, it is indeed an
honour and a privilege to present to you the Civil Aviation Bill. Last year
South Africa was audited and assessed by the International Civil Aviation
Organisation, ICAO, and the Federal Aviation Administration, FAA, of the
United States of America. Both the ICAO audit and the FAA International
Aviation Safety Assessment, IASA, reflected a finding which warranted the
review, consolidation and harmonisation of our various pieces of civil
aviation legislation, thus ensuring that it complies with international
requirements.

As we may appreciate, given our past history, the core spine of our civil
aviation legal foundation stems from the Aviation Act, Act 74 of 1962, an
Act which is to date at the very least 46 years old. Civil aviation has
certainly evolved over the past decades and has moved at a very fast pace
and so too must its legislative framework; more so in the light of the
tragic event of 9/11, the ongoing imminent global threat of terrorism and
equally concerning the increase in the rate of civil aircraft disasters.

It is therefore on this platform that the department has concentrated its
focus on ensuring that the three main Acts, the Aviation Act of 1962, the
South African Civil Aviation Authority Act of 1998 and the Civil Aviation
Offences Act of 1972 are all harmonised, consolidated, strengthened and
modernised in one Act. This will ensure that we have a simple, single piece
of aviation legislation, which addresses the needs of the aviation
transport sector both on the domestic and international fronts, with a
clear reporting line for the control and regulation of both the safety and
security oversight for civil aviation headed by the Director of the South
African Civil Aviation Authority.

This Bill empowers the director to issue technical standards for civil
aviation on matters as may be prescribed by regulations from time to time.

In addition, and in keeping with the challenges we face on a daily basis,
the Bill contains an expediency clause which allows for the director to
call on the Minister to issue emergency regulations when there is an
imminent or prevailing danger to the safety and security of the civil
aviation industry. This is most necessary given the dastardly acts
committed against aviation in recent times.

The Bill tabled today proposes to repeal, consolidate and amend aviation
laws giving effect to certain International Aviation Conventions and it
provides for the control and regulation of civil aviation within South
Africa. This Bill further sets out to provide for the establishment of the
South African Civil Aviation Authority and its objects, amongst other
things, are to control, regulate and promote civil aviation safety and
security, develop regulations that are required in terms of this Act and
also monitor and ensure compliance with this Act and all conventions.

The CAA will have a board whose core mandate is to oversee and provide
strategic direction for the corporate governance structures of the CAA in
order to attain the objectives that have been mentioned. This board will
also be tasked to monitor service standards and customer satisfaction and
report to the Minister of Transport on any matter concerning such issues.

In line with international best practice, the Bill provides for the
establishment of the independent Aviation Safety Investigation Board which
is structured in compliance with the provisions and procedures of Annex 13
of the Chicago Convention, to which our country is a signatory.

I am pleased to note that the Aviation Safety Investigation Board is fully
independent and that its members, staff, accredited representatives,
experts and advisors must serve and execute their duties in an impartial
and independent manner. They will also carry out their powers, duties and
functions in good faith and, most importantly, without fear, favour, bias
or prejudice and subject only to this Act and the Chicago Convection.

Unlawful, unruly behaviour and acts of terror targeted at the civil
aviation sector must be dealt with decisively. This requires an ongoing
preventative programme which sets out very clear parameters and
deliverables on what is required of security at all our designated
airports.

Annex 17 to the Chicago Convention, and the guidelines to the security
manual, as populated for the Annex, require that each state must have
within its administration a National Civil Aviation Security Programme,
NCASP.

This Bill makes provision for the NCASP and establishes a National Civil
Aviation Security Committee whose core purpose is to ensure the efficient
and proper co-ordination of security agencies dealing with civil aviation
security in South Africa, thus ensuring the proper and diligent
implementation of the National Aviation Security Programme.

The Bill also requires that the CAA as a regulator must be tasked with
oversight of safety and security for civil aviation. In fulfilling this
mandate it will take enforcement decisions and in all likelihood make
administrative decisions on a daily basis.

The Bill will apply to every aircraft, aerodrome and aviation facility, all
designated airports and so on; every person employed in the navigation
facility; and all foreign registered aircraft. The Bill, in essence, is a
product of the review, consolidation and harmonisation of all the various
Acts that have been referred to.

I request that the NA pass this Bill, please. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Chairperson, Minister Radebe, friends, colleagues
and comrades. The airlines operating within South Africa, our civil
aviation regulator, the Civil Aviation Authority and our air traffic
navigational services all have an excellent international safety
reputation.

It is true that in recent weeks there has once more been a spate of
accidents on the light and leisure side of aviation – what is known as
general aviation. Most of these appear to have been related to human error.
Notwithstanding these unfortunate incidents, it is simply a fact that it is
infinitesimally safer to travel in our skies than, unfortunately, it is to
travel on our roads.
However, the tragedy of 9/11 in the United States and concerns about the
safety of air travel in some parts of the world, including in parts of our
continent, underline just how important it is not to become complacent
about aviation standards and about safety and security. It is against this
general global background that the South African Civil Aviation Authority,
the CAA, is regularly audited by the International Civil Aviation
Organisation, ICAO. In recent years the US Federal Aviation Authority has
also been auditing other national regulators, particularly in countries
like our own, into which US airlines are flying, or whose airlines are
flying into the US. I would like to be anti-imperialist, but given the
FAA’s enormous experience and expertise, I think, as South Africans, we
should welcome these audits that they have been conducting.

The present legislation, in fact, flows directly out of some of these
recent audits, which raised questions on the structuring of our civil
aviation regulatory regime, in particular in regard to the lines of
reporting, command and answerability around aviation safety and security.

The problems in this area arose from the fact that there were three
separate Acts that had been passed at separate times - going back to the
Aviation Act of 1962; the Civil Aviation Offences Act of 1972; and the more
recent South African Civil Aviation Authority Act of 1998. These Acts did
not properly align with each other and this Bill now seeks to repeal all of
those Acts and introduce a more aligned dispensation for aviation
regulation.

Among the challenges that were raised in these international audits of our
system was the fact that we had an Aviation Commissioner sitting in the
Department of Transport and reporting directly to the Minister on the one
hand, and then on the other hand a CEO of the CAA reporting to a board,
with the board reporting to the Minister. The lines of authority and
responsibility were open to potential confusion. Fortunately I don’t think
that ever happened in practice, but if there had been a serious or major
national security threat, for instance, these confusing lines of command,
authority and responsibility might have provoked problems.

In the past several months we’ve tried to produce a patch-up solution to
this - we’ve made the commissioner and the CEO of the CAA one and the same
person. Clearly that was a temporary solution, so in this current
legislation we have sought to clean up this whole area. We have done away
with a separate commissioner and CEO and created a Director of Civil
Aviation. That director will head the CAA and on critical matters of
aviation safety and security the director will report directly to the
Minister.

What then is the role of the CAA board? This became a critical area of
debate and dispute and discussion in our public hearings. Some stakeholders
favoured a board with full responsibility for all of the CAA’s functions.
That is, they favoured a model in which the director would report to the
board on all matters and the board would then report to the Minister. On
the other hand, some of us wondered why we needed a board at all. The CAA
is, after all, a safety regulator and not a publicly owned entity operating
as a commercial enterprise like Transnet, SAA or Eskom. In those latter
cases, like Transnet or SAA, a board focusing on the complex corporate
market interests of the entity makes eminent sense.

In the end, the committee settled for a hybrid arrangement for the CAA, as
was proposed in the original Bill tabled before Parliament. The director,
as I said, reports directly to the Minister on the key regulatory functions
of safety and security. The board, however, is responsible for corporate
governance matters such as financial management, human resource policies,
etc.

In the committee stage we added a further functional responsibility for the
board, because among its tasks, the CAA is also a service provider to the
private sector. It licences pilots, for instance. We’ve now added that the
board should be required to monitor the service standards and customer
satisfaction levels and report to the Minister on any matters concerning
such issues.

So we didn’t take the more radical step, which some of us favoured, of
entirely dispensing with the CAA board. The committee, however, in its
report to Parliament on this Bill, has recommended that the new Parliament
– and presumably therefore the new executive - should do a more
comprehensive review of the broad spectrum of corporate and governance
models that are in place for a range of public entities.

We have SOEs, public utilities, agencies of all kinds, economic regulators,
safety regulators, etc. Over the past three Parliaments, we have surely
begun to develop a more grounded experience. I think in the mid-1990s we
might have made the assumption that a one-size-fits-all institutional
arrangement for this vast array of entities made sense - a kind of
corporate entity with a board of directors, etc.

In our experience, certainly over these last four years, as this portfolio
committee, I think we’ve run into a number of problems in this whole
governance because we are dealing with different entities and they’re not
the same kind of entity. Whether the same corporate structure is
appropriate is something that we would like to see reviewed by the next
government and the next Parliament.

The committee is recommending that next year some kind of White Paper
policy process, perhaps led by the Department of Public Enterprises and by
the corresponding portfolio committee here in Parliament, should review our
experience across the spectrum of parastatal entities.

In this legislation we have chosen to strike a more cautious middle road.
In addition to these matters, this rather long and technically complicated
Bill also establishes an independent Aviation Safety Investigation Board in
compliance with Annex 13 of the Chicago Convention. The Bill also gives
effect to provisions of the international Convention on Offences and
Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft.

I would like to thank our hardworking colleagues from the Department of
Transport, including Anwar and the team that he led. Given its technical
complexities, this was not an easy piece of legislation, and so our special
thanks go to the drafters and also to the state law advisers. I know, as a
chairperson, that my own preferred, rather open-ended workshop style of
tackling legislation like this does not make it easy for the drafters or
the lawyers, but hopefully it results in a better product at the end of the
day. Thanks also to our colleagues from the CAA and its board, and to the
civil aviation sector, that kept us on our toes as a committee and helped
us tremendously with their professional and technical knowledge. Finally,
thank you to all the members of the portfolio committee. The ANC supports
the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Chairperson, firstly I would like to welcome the Minister in
the House. We haven’t seen much of him and I trust that while he is in the
precincts of this Parliament, he will go to his office and pick up some
pressing correspondence that I have sent to him recently.

The Bill before us is the culmination of a process that started some time
ago and, as has been said by the two speakers before me, this was brought
about as a result of and compliance with the Regulations of the
International Civil Aviation Association, and to address matters of concern
which were raised by the FAA.

Both these agencies report on and audit the aviation safety and security
status of some 89 states worldwide to ensure that they are compliant with
international standards and, in South Africa’s case, that we meet our
obligations applicable to the conventions and agreements that we have
signed.

During the 2007-08 financial year both these reports gave South Africa
Category 1 status, which is of major strategic importance to South Africa.
Failure to maintain this status would have resulted in the closure of
routes and the prevention of aircraft being flown by our carriers to the
USA and abroad, and would have severe implications for our preparations for
the Fifa World Cup in 2010.

To this end, the Bill repeals, consolidates and amends the current aviation
laws whilst providing for a newly structured and independent Aviation
Investigation Board, the appointment of a director reporting directly to
the Minister and in so doing separating the current dual function of the
chief executive officer/commissioner of the Civil Aviation Authority, CAA.

The role of the CAA’s present board now changes from one of being purely
the accounting authority of the entity under section 49(2)(a) of the Public
Finance Management Act, in other words, oversight of the corporate
governance element of the CAA, on the one hand.

The director, on the other hand, is now tasked with oversight powers and
functions as embraced in the Bill before us, including all technical civil
aviation safety standards. His or her financial responsibilities will be
held to account through the normal Auditor- General’s reporting function
whilst one of his or her prime roles will be, through the Department of
Transport, to monitor, implement and enforce the National Aviation Security
Program, Nasp, and to serve on the National Aviation Security Committee.
This body comprises aviation and security personnel from the state entities
and also relevant government departments.

The object of this committee would be to advise the director with regard to
Aviation Security Policy and co-ordinate the proper and diligent
implementation of the Nasp. The success of any such programme relies
heavily on the support of the aviation industry and it would be imperative
for the director to meet regularly with these stakeholders that our
chairperson spoke about to ensure that they conform to international and
domestic standards and regulations which may be introduced from time to
time.

One of the more positive aspects of the Bill was that it removes any
chances of conflict of interest or opportunity of corruption by any person
appointed to perform any function in terms of this Bill. Clearly, the
authors have learnt from the history of this authority and all the problems
associated with the likes of Messrs Trevor Abrahams, Myeza and Naidoo, who
cost the CAA and our taxpayers millions in corruption. Also, in trying to
get rid of them, we had to pay them millions of rands.

One aspect which stood out in deliberations on the Bill was the apparent
need for the establishment of the Aviation Regulatory Authority, which my
chairperson has already covered, and this would take care of the nearly
R180 million in the form of user fees, fuel levies and aircraft safety
charges that come into the CAA every year. This is something that needs
really good control and independent regulation if it is to avoid a budget
balancing exercise which the CAA may try to introduce. But more
importantly, it will prevent the payment of excessively high salaries to
personnel and the acquisition of plush offices and fancy cars for its
management.

The DA will be keeping a very close eye on this type of expenditure until
something is enacted to regulate the level of levies and what they can be
used for.

The DA will nonetheless be supporting the Bill, you will be pleased to
know, Mr Minister. Thank you.

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, the Civil Aviation Bill is very important
because it has the function of conducting safety and security oversight.
South African Airways has been one of the safest carriers in the world and
most certainly in Africa. However, to maintain this standard we must
continue to monitor the safety performance of the aviation industry. We
have to look at the risk factors and safety and security trends. Without a
doubt we have to make use of major aviation skills and do all we can to
retain the technical skills in our country.

The Bill was a complicated one which needed much discussion. Firstly, I
must say the size of the Bill was intimidating. However, the chairman and
the committee were courageous in their approach. It is also important to
add that the Department of Transport and the legal advisers were extremely
patient and helpful. The Aviation Safety Investigation Board and the
operators were also on hand to clarify certain aspects of the Bill.

The main issue that the IFP grappled with was the director’s position. It
was our assumption that there was a danger of forming two centres of power.
He or she would interact with the board and was also permitted to go
directly to the Minister of Transport. This was a cause for concern.

It was made clear to us that the director would only go to the Minister
regarding matters pertaining to the threat or imminent risk to safety or
security. Eventually there was a statement by the committee acknowledging
that the issue of the director will be revisited.

I regret that the Bill had to be debated today, and not on Thursday, which
would have been after our caucus meeting. The IFP supports the Bill. Thank
you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP shares the view that there was a clear
need to tighten up and consolidate legislation regarding civil aviation,
particularly following the 9/11 tragedy and, domestically, the now infamous
incident of an engine falling off a Nationwide aircraft, as well as a spate
of fatal light aircraft incidents and accidents in the recent past.

Aviation safety cannot be compromised in any manner, particularly in the
run-up to the 2010 Soccer World Cup when many thousands of additional
tourists will be coming to South Africa. This Bill will also address
comments and concerns expressed by the FAA in its audit report and other
concerns expressed by those involved in the local aviation industry.

The primary purpose of the newly established Aviation Safety Investigation
Board will be to prevent aircraft accidents. It will, inter alia, identify
safety deficiencies and report publicly on its findings.

Although the Bill makes provision for the establishment of a number of new
structures, the majority of these structures currently exist within the
aviation framework, although in a different form.
The ACDP will support this Bill as well as the report which recommends a
comprehensive review of the government’s regulatory entities. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, air travel has become a very common mode of
travel. However, to travel by air has become very expensive and is not
accessible to the people. Airport taxes increase on a weekly basis,
offering no relief, and cheaper airlines now charge as much as R2 000 for a
one-way ticket.

While this Bill clearly assists in making air travel safer, better managed
and sustainable, the MF seeks ways of making air travel more accessible by
minimising costs. The MF remembers that not too long ago, when cheaper
airlines were officially introduced, their prices were very similar to bus
travel and accessible. Those limits have now been exceeded. The Civil
Aviation Bill, however, offers a major turnaround for this sector.

It would be wise to conduct comparative studies of civil aviation safety
exercised globally to assist in making air travel even safer. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Before I call the next speaker, could I
just appeal to members to lower the level of noise. It is becoming
difficult to follow the debate. We know that some parties have relaunched
themselves and they are very excited, but let’s keep it down.

Mr B L MASHILE: Chairperson, the hon Minister of Transport, hon chairperson
of the portfolio committee, Mr Jeremy Cronin, and all members, it is an
honour for me to participate in the debate on the Civil Aviation Bill of
2008.

The debate on this Bill is intended to result in a piece of legislation to
inform the regime of the civil aviation industry. In the past two months
this country has seen numerous aircraft accidents and incidents. Quite a
number of persons have lost their lives during these accidents. The safety
and security of our lives in the aviation industry is slowly and gradually
becoming suspect. Our international safety record is crumbling.

Acknowledging and responding to this turn of events, the ANC-led government
proposed to introduce measures to intervene and eventually tighten the
screws and close the gaps within the aviation industry. Recognising our
international standing, and as a signatory to international conventions,
the current regime needed a complete repeal, hence this Civil Aviation Bill
of 2008.

The Civil Aviation Bill of 2008, as it is presented to the House today,
seeks to establish the South African CAA and the Aviation Security
Investigation board. The CAA will have a safety and security oversight
function and will be led by the director, who will be responsible for the
general management and administration of the authority under the direction
of the board, and the safety and security of the aviation industry under
the direction of the Minister.

The CAA board is responsible for the corporate governance of the authority.
It is a rare situation where the director of the CAA will be reporting to
two masters on different matters handled by the same entity. This anomaly
arises from the dictates of the International Civil Aviation Organisation.
The possibility of contradictions was mitigated with the inclusion of the
director as a board member. The relationship is such that he or she will
report to the board on matters of safety and security in the civil aviation
industry.

Given the nature and the complexity of the industry and the number of
interested parties in the industry, further institutional arrangements were
necessary to ensure that safety and security is not compromised. In this
Bill, therefore, a further number of structures are created to deal with
issues relating to safety and security. The Minister will institute a
national aviation security committee whose object will be to advise the
Minister with regard to aviation policy, review and make recommendations
regarding the effectiveness of security measures and procedures and provide
for co-ordination to ensure the proper and diligent implementation of the
national aviation security programme.

The Minister will appoint one or more appeals committees consisting of
three part-time members to consider and decide appeals. The Bill empowers
authorised persons to effect, arrest of a person who has committed or is
reasonably suspected to have committed any offence under this Act. These
authorised persons are empowered to use force reasonably necessary under
the circumstances to effect arrests against resistance or fleeing.

The authorised persons are, as defined in the Act, any member of the
service as defined in the South African Police Service Act of 1995, any
person appointed in writing by management of a designated airport with the
approval of the Minister, any member of the SANDF, as defined in the
Defence Act of 2002, any person designated in writing by the director of
the South African CAA as an authorised person in terms of section 94(1) of
this Act, or any person appointed by the Minister for purposes of this Act.

The Bill also provides for the institution of a civil aviation regulations
committee to advise the Minister on proposals with regard to the
introduction, amendment, or withdrawal of any regulation, the introduction,
amendment, or withdrawal of any technical standard and any matter relating
to civil aviation, including any such matter referred to it by the
director. The committee may, subject to the approval of the director,
establish such subcommittees as it may deem necessary for the performance
of its functions.

Lastly, this Bill also provides for the establishment of the aviation
safety investigation board to advance aviation transportation safety by
conducting independent investigations, identifying safety deficiencies,
making recommendations to reduce or eliminate any safety deficiencies,
report publicly on its investigations and on the findings, promoting
compliance with the provision of Annex 13 to the convention, investigating
aircraft accidents and incidents, in compliance with the provisions of
Annex 13 to the convention, and discharge all other functions and
obligations in compliance with the provisions and procedures of Annex 13 to
the convention.

Chairperson, this Bill seeks to give practical expression to a number of
provisions of the Bill of Rights in our Constitution. This Bill talks to
section 12(1)(c) on freedom and security of persons and section 24(a) and
(b) on an environment that everyone has a right to. It is in this spirit
that the rights of citizens are protected from the ills of the aviation
industry. The institutional arrangements are meant to put people first in
the conduct of aviation business within and beyond the borders of the
Republic.

As the ANC, the only tested and trusted organisation interested in
advancing the interest of the citizens, we will not pass legislation which
has not been checked against the wishes of the people.

When we say the people shall govern, we really mean what we say. The ANC,
therefore, supports the Civil Aviation Bill of 2008. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, I would like to thank all Members
of Parliament and the portfolio committee for their total support of the
Civil Aviation Bill. I can only say amen and thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON
   APPOINTMENT OF A PERSON TO FILL A VACANCY IN SOUTH AFRICAN HUMAN RIGHTS
                                 COMMISSION

There was no debate.

Question put: That the House approves the nomination of Ms P Govender to
fill the position of a full-time commissioner on the South African Human
Rights Commission.

   AYES - 252: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
   E; Baloyi, M R; Bekker, H J; Beukman, F; Bhengu, P; Biyela, B P ;
   Blanché, J P I; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Boinamo, G G; Bonhomme, T
   J; Booi, M S; Botha, C-S; Burgess, C V; Camerer, S M; Cele, M A;
   Chalmers, J; Chohan, F I; Cronin, J P; Cupido, H B ; Cwele, S C; Dambuza,
   B N; Davidson, I O; Davies, R H; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlali, D M; Doidge, G
   Q M; Doman, W P; Du Toit, D C; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Fankomo, F C;
   Farrow, S B; Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L;
   Gabanakgosi, P S; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gaum, A H; George, D T; Gerber, P A;
   Gigaba, K M N; Godongwana, E; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Gore, V C;
   Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A;
   Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Julies, I F; Kalako, M U; Kalyan,
   S V; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D; Kgabi, L M; Khauoe, M K; Khoarai, L P;
   Khumalo, K K; Khunou, N P; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Koornhof, G W;
   Labuschagne, L B; Landers, L T; Lebenya, P; Lekgetho, G; Lishivha, T E;
   Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lowe, C M; Lucas, E J; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N;
   Maake, J J; Mabaso, S B; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A
   F; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlaba, T L; Mahlangu-
   Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X
   C; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Mapisa-
   Nqakula, N N; Marais, S J F; Martins, B A D; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J;
   Mashile, B L; Mashishi, A C; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H;
   Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbete, B;
   Mdaka, N M; Meruti, M V; Mfeketo, N C; Mfundisi, I S; Mgabadeli, H C;
   Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlangeni, A; Mncwango, M A; Mnguni, B A;
   Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng , T R; Mogale, O
   M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Moiloa-Nqodi, S B; Mokoena,
   A D; Mokoto, N R; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy,
   K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I;
   Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpontshane, A M; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G;
   Nash, J H; Ndlazi, Z A; Ndlovu, V B; Ndzanga, R A; Nefolovhodwe, P J;
   Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N
   D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngcobo, N W; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J;
   Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkabinde, N C; Nogumla, R Z;
   Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, R S; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M
   D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyembe, K K M; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A;
   Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Phala, M J; Pieterse, R
   D; Pule, B E; Rabie, P J; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T;
   Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M;
   Ramotsamai, C P M; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D;
   Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M ; Selau, J G; Semple, J A;
   Seremane, W J; Sibande, M P; Sibhidla, N N; Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W;
   Sigcau , S N; Sikakane, M R; Singh, N; Sisulu, L N; Sizani, S; Skhosana,
   W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, V G; Smuts, M; Solo, B M;
   Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C;
   Sunduza, T B; Swanson-Jacobs, J; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Thomson, B;
   Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Twala, N
   M; Vadi, I; Van Der Walt, D; Van Wyk, A; Vos, S C; Wang, Y; Waters, M;
   Weber, H; Wright, F J; Xolo, E T; Zikalala, C N Z; Zulu, B Z.


Question agreed to.


Nomination accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 193(5)(b)(ii)
of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): I would like to recognise the presence
of Ms P Govender in the gallery. [Applause.] Congratulations, Ms Govender.
                       TOBACCO PRODUCTS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

               MEDICINES AND RELATED SUBSTANCES AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

Declaration of vote:

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, when this Bill was discussed in the House,
the IFP was strongly opposed to the structure as it was adopted, because it
meant that a multibillion rand industry would work through the Sapra, and
it had a structure that lacked transparency and accountability. It also
meant there was merely a CEO who was accountable to the Minister in a
public entity.

Since then, the NCOP introduced this amendment, which has introduced a
further structure between the CEO and the Minister. It has resulted in the
body not being a full public entity, and it has created transparency and
accountability. It is an excellent amendment.

We commend those people who introduced it; it shows the value of having the
NCOP as a check on what we do. We are very happy to support this Bill now
that the structure is more transparent and accountable. It is going to be a
much better body which will regulate our medicines and we are all going to
be safer as a result.

So, the IFP would particularly like to put on record that we support the
changes and also feel that the changes to the Ethics Committee and the
Appeal Committee have been very constructive. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.
            PREVENTION OF AND TREATMENT FOR SUBSTANCE ABUSE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                   MANDATING PROCEDURES OF PROVINCES BILL

          (Consideration of Report of Mediation Committee on Bill)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

                             CHILD JUSTICE BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

Mr J H JEFFERY: Chairperson, the amendments from the NCOP were largely of a
technical nature and the NA committee agreed with all of them bar one. I
don’t think I need to go into the reasons.

However, there were problems with the quality of the printing of the D
version of the Bill. It was originally printed with a number of mistakes.
Those mistakes have been corrected, but there is still a mistake in the
Bill which needs to be corrected.

Chairperson, I therefore want to move:

  That in clause 65, line 12 on page 38, the words “or a guardian” should
  be inserted after “adult”.


There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill (with textual corrections), as amended, accordingly passed.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): I’ve been informed that Orders 9 and 10
on the Order Paper will stand over. Therefore, the Secretary will now read
the 11th Order.

                         BROADCASTING AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr I VADI: Chairperson, you caught me off guard with the change on the
Order Paper.

It is my pleasure to report on the progress that the Portfolio Committee on
Communications has made on the Broadcasting Amendment Bill. Hon members
will remember that this Bill was introduced and approved by the NA earlier
this year.

Essentially, the Bill provides for the resignation of a member of the board
or for the removal from office of a member of the SABC board. It further
makes provision for a resolution of the NA calling for the dissolution of
the board if the board fails in any of the following: discharging its
fiduciary duties; adhering to the charter of the corporation; or properly
and judiciously managing the affairs of the corporation.

The original Bill empowered the President, in conjunction with the Speaker,
to appoint and remove the SABC board if recommended to do so by the NA. It
also made provision for the appointment of an interim board. The Bill was
then referred to the NCOP.

It is important to note that the NCOP held its own public hearings on the
matter, and it wisely introduced two key amendments. The first is that the
President remains the appointing authority of the SABC board. While the
original suggestion was that the appointing authority should be the
President in conjunction with the Speaker, the NCOP said it should be the
President only. This is a sensible amendment as it eliminates the
possibility for the constitutional ambiguity that relates to the original
clause. It reaffirms the principle of the separation of powers that
underpins our constitutional order.

The second amendment introduced by the NCOP sets a quorum for an interim
board. This was an oversight on our part which has now been corrected. The
portfolio committee therefore welcomes and accepts all the amendments
proposed by the NCOP and commends the revised Bill to the House. If this
Bill is approved by the House today and is assented to by the President, a
lawful mechanism will have been created to act against the SABC Board if it
displays any signs of dysfunctionality and if it fails in discharging its
statutory responsibilities.

The truth of the matter is that the current SABC board, for various and
different reasons, lacks popular credibility, even though it was
established through a legitimate process. At present there is widespread
dissatisfaction with the board over the manner in which it carries out its
corporate governance responsibility. Important voices in civil society, the
media and political formations have, therefore, either called for the
resignation of members of the board or for their removal from office.

Parliament cannot be deaf to these growing concerns. However, the law, as
it stands now, precludes that from happening. Well, the law is now being
amended and a legal basis is being created for acting against the SABC,
should it be deemed necessary. In this regard, I wish to counsel the House
that if it institutes any proceedings against the board in future, the
administrative processes must be fair, just and legally defensible.
Simultaneously, the reasons for such action must be cogent and consistent
with the legal conditions set out in this Bill. If these conditions are met
in an open and transparent manner, I have no doubt that there will be
significant public support for the decisions of the NA.

With these few words of introduction, the ANC supports the Broadcasting
Amendment Bill and recommends that the House adopts the Bill. Thank you.

There was no debate.

Declarations of vote.

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, the NCOP has removed one of two constitutionally
offensive provisions from this Bill. It has removed the redefinition of the
appointing authority that would have forced the President of the Republic
to appoint the SABC board in consultation with the Speaker.

That provision offended against the doctrine of the separation of powers.
It is now gone; so is Mr Thabo Mbeki, which is the real reason for the
change. Still, it is a vindication of the position taken here by all
opposition parties, and we obviously support the NCOP amendment in this
respect.

However, the NCOP has not changed the second constitutionally problematic
provision. We will therefore not vote in favour of the Bill in this, its
final form. We will vote against it. We will also petition President
Motlanthe not to sign it but to send it back to this House because the
proposed purge of a duly appointed board without due inquiry is
unconstitutional.
Mr Blade Nzimande can pontificate as much as he likes on public platforms
that the board cannot remain in office for, I quote, “another day”. He can
terrify the SACP and Members of Parliament into trying, against their
better judgement, to pass meaningless motions of no confidence in the
board, as they tried again yesterday until we stopped them in their tracks
and allowed the board to give what I thought was a very good account of
itself on the fiduciary front and in respect of its duties under the
charter.

You are not going to be able to evict this board! These are the same
Members of Parliament who removed the requirement for due enquiry after the
SACP’s Mr Malesela Maleka, in a submission, called such due inquiry “a
counter-revolutionary attempt to protect bourgeois space with legal
concepts”.

The proposition that an entire board may be dissolved is intimidatory, as I
have said before. It is destructive of the independence without which the
SABC cannot protect its editorial staff and the right of the public to be
informed. The proposal that this can be done without an inquiry is
obviously unconstitutional.

The SACP is already ventilating the names of the five lefties it thinks it
is going to install without due process as an interim board in terms of
this Bill. This isn’t going to happen, Mr Nzimande, not before the election
and certainly not after it. [Applause.]
Ms S C VOS: Chairperson, the IFP supports the amendment to this Bill that
comes to us from the NCOP because we opposed the clause in Parliament when
the Bill was first debated here.

Nevertheless, the IFP opposes this Bill in its entirety for all the reasons
we have previously stated. It is a bad law. It is motivated by the ANC
alliance wishing to control the SABC Board and hire and fire its members
without any semblance of administrative justice – without due inquiry. We
believe that this is unconstitutional. That is what the chairperson, Mr
Vadi, told us there today from this very podium. He has told us that this
is in fact their intention. Their intention is to fire the current SABC
board.

However, we also intend to petition the President of the Republic not to
sign this Bill into law. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Chair, the ID certainly supports the removal of the clause
in this Bill by the NCOP as we opposed it in the NA.

The ID is still vehemently opposed to this Bill, however, as it allows for
the removal of the board without due inquiry, which is in complete
contravention of all the rules of administrative justice. We must avoid
drafting laws simply to satisfy changing political dispensations. The ID
opposes this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, let there be no doubt that we are in the
middle of a very serious fight for the soul of the SABC. The elections make
it more serious for the moment as the ANC, for the first time, experiences
being on the receiving end of biased reporting. We are used to this as we
have been experiencing it for many years! This is what this Bill is all
about.

Die SAUK is ’n openbare uitsaaier, nie ’n staatsuitsaaier nie. Mag hy nooit
dit word nie, want dan het ons moeilikheid in Suid-Afrika.

Die harde werklikheid is dat die SAUK tans grootliks ’n nuus-monopolie het.
Daar is SABC 3 wat jy met eTv se Engelse nuus kan vergelyk, maar al die
ander nuusbulletins het net die SAUK in die bulletin. Daarom is dit
belangrik dat hy objektief moet bly, neutraal moet bly en niemand beheer
oor hom moet kry nie.

’n Onafhanklike regstelsel is net so belangrik soos ’n onfahanklike
openbare uitsaaiser wat oor nuus beheer het.

Ek wil u nie terugvat na Zimbabwe toe nie, maar gaan kyk maar wat daar
verkeerdgeloop het. Vanaf 1980 het Robert Mugabe onmiddelik die
uitsaaistelsel beheer. Dit het gelei tot waar ons vandag met die
moeilikheid sit.

Hoe kry jy beheer oor ’n uitsaaistelsel? Jy kry dit op ’n subtiele manier.
Jy hou ’n swaard oor die kop van die mense daar. Jy dreig hulle met
afdanking op die geringste die-kant of daardie-kant. Sonder om hard te
praat, weet elkeen dat hulle uiteindelik moet doen wat van hulle verwag
word, want daar is base oor hul koppe.

Regters word aangestel sonder enige moontlikheid om van hulle ontslae te
kan raak; dit verseker dat hulle onafhanklik is. Die SAUK behoort in
dieselfde posisie te wees, dat iemand aangestel moet kan word, volle
vetroue geniet en in sy posisie kan aanbly.

Ek ken die argumente van onbekwaamheid, van probleme hier en daar, maar ek
sê vir u, hierdie maak eintlik van die SAUK ’n skoothond na alle kante toe.

Ek praat nie eers van die feit dat dit nie so maklik is om van ’n
Parlementslid hier ontslae te raak sonder ’n ingewikkelde regs- en
administratiewe proses nie. Gaan probeer maar ’n bietjie om van u mense
hier af te dank. Hierso, maklik soort van, gaan ontslae geraak word van
SAUK raadslede, om sekere politieke doeleindes.

Die VF Plus gaan teen die wetgewing stem en neem graag deel aan die petisie
uiteindelik om dit by die President te kry en dit daar te stop. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The SABC is a public broadcaster, not a state broadcaster. May it never
become one, because then there will be trouble in South Africa.

The harsh reality is that the SABC to a large extent presently enjoys a
monopoly on news. We do have SABC 3, which one can compare to eTv’s English
news, but the other news bulletins are all SABC throughout. That is why it
is important for it to remain objective and neutral, while nobody gains
control of it.

An independent judiciary is just as important as an independent broadcaster
in control of news.

I don’t want to take you back to Zimbabwe, but just take a look at what
went wrong there. From 1980 onwards Robert Mugabe immediately gained
control of the broadcasting system. This led to the problems we are faced
with today.

How does one gain control of a broadcasting system? You do it in a subtle
way. You hold a sword over the heads of the people there. You threaten them
with instant dismissal at the least sign of divergence. Without any voice
being raised everybody knows that in the end they must do what is expected
of them, because there are bosses at their heels.

Judges are being appointed without any possibility of getting rid of them;
this ensures their impartiality. The SABC should be in the same position,
that someone can be appointed, enjoy full confidence and remain in his or
her post.

I know the arguments about incompetence and problems here and there, but I
am telling you that this is actually turning the SABC into a lapdog on all
sides.

I am not even talking about the fact that it is not so easy to get rid of a
Member of Parliament here without an intricate legal and administrative
process. Just try to dismiss some of your people here. In this instance,
kind of effortlessly, certain SABC board members are going to be done away
with for certain political purposes.

The FF Plus will be voting against this legislation and would like to
support the petition in order ultimately to present it to the President and
to stop it there. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP shares the sentiments expressed by the
opposition parties. Whilst we support the NCOP amendment that removes the
need for consultation with the Speaker on the appointment of the board, we
clearly still maintain on record our opposition to the Bill in its
entirety, which seeks to control the appointment of the members of the
board without fair administrative action and their firing in terms of that.

In our view, there would be endless litigation if this Bill is passed in
its present form. The intention is clear – to fire the board without what
would be due administration. The ACDP, therefore, will not support the Bill
in its entirety. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the first object of the Bill is, of course, to
allow for the Speaker to assist with appointing the SABC board. This should
not have been a consideration worthy of the time spent on the matter in the
portfolio committee. From the outset, the content of the Bill was
unconstitutional and undemocratic. The portfolio committee should have then
made a decision in principle not to consider the Bill.

The NCOP in having considered the Bill has come to the conclusion that it
will be inappropriate of the executive to be directly involved with the
selection of the SABC board. The amendments to the Bill by the NCOP reverse
the one adopted by the NA and recommends that the powers of the executive
will be limited with regard to the SABC board.

We must applaud the second Chamber for taking a stand in this regard. The
FD, a member of the Christian Democratic Alliance, has always maintained
that public broadcasting enterprises should not be used for purposes of
political gain.

The purposes of the executive, in particular, in this regard must be
subject to public scrutiny; and since the people have entrusted Parliament
with that responsibility, it is our duty to exercise appropriate controls
over the executives.

The elections in 2009 demand that the SABC we want is one that is committed
to editorial independence and which ensures that election coverage is done
without any bias towards any political party. This morning the SABC board
met with political parties and promised that we can expect equitable and
fair coverage of the 2009 elections. The Bill we will support will be one
that informs the democratic principles of an open and transparent public
broadcasting system. Anything less remains unacceptable. The FD will
therefore not support the Bill.

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Inkatha Freedom Party, Independent
Democrats, African Christian Democratic Party, United Christian Democratic
Party, Freedom Front Plus and Federation of Democrats dissenting).

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

                               COMPANIES BILL


                           (Consideration of Bill)


Mr B A D MARTINS: Hon Chairperson and hon members, the Companies Bill
provides for the repeal of the current Companies Act, Act 61 of 1973 and
proposes a new legislative framework for the incorporation, registration,
organisation and management of companies.

After conducting public hearings and a thorough consideration of the
introduced Bill, the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry agreed on a
number of substantive and legal technical amendments. Subsequently, the
amending Bill, Bill No 61 of 2008 was sent to the NCOP for concurrence.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Order! I’m sorry, hon Martins. Hon
members, please lower your voices. Those leaving the Chamber, do so
quietly. Continue.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Chairperson, during this process, upon further reflection
on the amending Bill, a few errors were identified. Amendments aimed at
rectifying inconsistencies in the use of terminology and the correction of
printing errors were submitted to the Select Committee for Economic and
Foreign Affairs. It is these amendments which are reflected in Bill No 61C
of 2008 which were recently agreed upon by the Portfolio Committee on Trade
and Industry.

I submit that Bill No 61D of 2008, incorporating the amendments embodied in
Bill No 61C of 2008, be adopted by this honourable House. I thank you.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

                   NATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS FRAMEWORK BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

 GENERAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING QUALITY ASSURANCE AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

              NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)
There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairman, I move:

   That the Bill be passed.


Motion agreed to.


Bill accordingly passed.

The House adjourned at 15:16.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


      1) Bill passed by National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
         on 19 November 2008:


          a) Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8F – 2007] (National
             Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).


    2) Bill passed by National Assembly on 20 August 2008:


          a) Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill [B 63B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 74).


    3) Bills passed by National Assembly on 19 November 2008:
          a) Child Justice Bill [B 49D – 2002] (National Assembly – sec
             75), with textual corrections (see Minutes of Proceedings of
             National Assembly, 19 November 2008).


          b) Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72B – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).


          c) Companies Bill [B 61D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          d) National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 36D –
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


          e) Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          f) Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 7D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).
          g) Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill [B 12D –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


          h) National Qualifications Framework Bill [B 33D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


          i) General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance
             Amendment Bill [B 35D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


    4) Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 19 November 2008:
          a) Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill [B 62B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 74).


          b) General Laws (Loss of Membership of National Assembly,
             Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill [B
             64B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          c) National Road Traffic Amendment Bill [B 39B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Withdrawal of Bill

    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration withdrew the
    following Bill on 11 November 2008:


    (a)     Public Administration Management Bill [B 47 – 2008] (National
        Assembly – sec 76(1)).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


      1) Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 19 November 2008 and transmitted for consideration
         of Council’s proposed amendments:


          a) National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B 23B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 17 November
             2008, p 2193).


          b) Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 42B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 18 November
             2008, p 2260).


             The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly
             for a report on the amendments proposed by the Council.


          c) South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B 30B – 2008
             (Reprint)] (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed
             amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports,
             17 November 2008, p 2193).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Safety
             and Security of the National Assembly for a report on the
             amendments proposed by the Council.


          d) Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 71B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 13 November
             2008, p 2135).
             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts
             and Culture of the National Assembly for a report on the
             amendments proposed by the Council.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Education

    (a)    Revised Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2008-
         2012 and the Operational Plans of the Department of Education for
         2008/9.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

   1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
      National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B41B-2008]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 19 November 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
      National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B41B-2008]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), and the proposed amendments by the
      National Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee
      Reports, 17 October 2008, p 1921), referred to the Committee, reports
      the Bill with amendments [B41C-2008].


2.     Report  of  the   Portfolio   Committee   on   Public   Service   and
      Administration on the Public Service Commission’s Fourth  Consolidated
      Monitoring and Evaluation Report of 2007, adopted by the Committee  on
      19 November 2008:

1.    Introduction

The Public Service Commission (PSC) was established in terms of  The  Public
Service Commission Act (No.46 of 1996) and Chapter 10  of  the  Constitution
(No. 108 of 1996). Its powers and functions are set out is section  196  (4)
of the Constitution. It states: “the powers and functions of the  Commission
are –
        a) to promote the values and principles set  out  in  section  195,
           throughout the public service;
        b) to  investigate,  monitor  and  evaluate  the  organisation  and
           administration,  and  the  personnel  practices  of  the  public
           service;
        c)  to  propose  measures  to  ensure   effective   and   efficient
           performance within the public service;
        d) to give directions aimed at ensuring that  personnel  procedures
           relating to recruitment, transfers,  promotions  and  dismissals
           comply with the values and principles set  out  in  section  195
           (1);
        e) to report in respect of its activities and  the  performance  of
           its functions, including any finding it may make and  directions
           and advice it may give, and to  provide  an  evaluation  of  the
           extent to which the values and principles set out in section 195
           are complied with”

The Fourth Consolidated Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Report is a  product
of the legislated functions and  powers  of  the  PSC.  It  reports  on  the
implementation of the nine constitutional values  and  principles  governing
public administration listed in Section 195(1) of the Constitution.

2.    Overview of the Fourth  Consolidated  Public  Service  Monitoring  and
      Evaluation Report

The focus of the “Fourth Consolidated  M&E  Report”  was  service  delivery.
This focus influenced the selection of  the  Departments  to  be  evaluated.
Most  departments  responsible   for   service   delivery   are   provincial
departments. The sample  of  sixteen  departments  that  the  PSC  evaluated
included the following:

National Departments:

   1. Department of Public Enterprises
   2. Department of Labour
   3. Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
   4. Department of Safety and Security

Provincial Departments:

   5. Western Cape: Department of Local Government and Housing
   6. Gauteng: Department of Community Safety
   7. Limpopo: Department of Agriculture
   8. Gauteng: Department of Sports and Recreation
   9. North West: Department of Economic Development and Tourism
  10. Eastern Cape: Department of Public Works
  11. Kwa-Zulu Natal: Department of Education
  12. Eastern Cape: Department of Local Government and Traditional Affairs
  13. Northern Cape: Department of Sport, Arts and Culture
  14. Eastern Cape: Department of Social Development
  15. Mpumulanga: Department of Safety and Security
  16. Free State: Department of Local Government and Housing

The methodology used was to score the departments between zero and  five  on
the achievement of performance indicators as identified  by  the  PSC.  Five
was the highest score, and meant  that  the  departments  were  implementing
legislation and governmental policies in line with  the  nine  basic  values
and principles outlined in Section 195(1) of the Constitution. Zero was  the
lowest score and meant that departments were not  meeting  the  requirements
of legislation and policies governing the public service.

Overall, the National Department of Public Enterprises  scored  the  highest
(4.33 out of 5) for the 2006/07 research  cycle.  Thirteen  of  the  sixteen
departments scored less than three overall. This meant that thirteen of  the
sixteen departments sampled were not implementing policies that  govern  the
administration in the public service.

Some of the challenges raised in the report were:

1)    Departments experienced challenged in implementing  poverty  reduction
  projects, due to lack of guidelines.  Difficulties  were  experienced  in
  engaging with communities to achieve  greater  beneficiary  participation
  and the alignment of projects with local development initiatives.
2)    Departments, whilst having shown an improvement in the preparation of
   their annual reports, continued to face  difficulties  when  it  came  to
   meeting all of the guidelines for annual reports. This was  most  evident
   with regard to ensuring public access to such reports.

3)    Departments continued to miss Employment Equity  targets,  and  failed
   to properly consider diversity management issues.

The report also provided an overview of performance over time.  The  overall
scores fluctuated but  were  relatively  low.  However,  an  improvement  in
scores was reported as ‘promising’, and was influenced by  the  improvements
in reporting standards. The change  observed  could  be  attributed  to  the
implementation  of  reporting  requirements  of  the  Auditor-General,   the
International Financial Reporting Standards and the Public  Audit  Act  (No.
25 of 2004).

3.    PSC Findings
The Department of  Public  Enterprises  was  noted  as  the  top  performing
department. There were a few departments that  performed  well  on  specific
constitutional principles. The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry  was
highlighted as a department  that  scored  100  per  cent  for  the  “Public
Participation in Policy-Making” constitutional basic value.

The Eastern Cape Provincial Department of Public Works  was  noted  for  its
poor performance in terms of its average time taken to fill a vacancy,  from
the date that the post has been advertised to the date of  appointment.  The
average  time  taken  to  fill  a  vacancy  was  949  days.  This   practice
contravenes  the  eighth  constitutional  value  of  “Good  human   resource
management, career development and practices”.

Absenteeism was highlighted  as  the  main  reason  for  misconduct  in  the
departments  studied.  The  implementation  of  attendance  registers  could
resolve this systemic problem.

Many of the problems identified by the PSC over the years  still  persisted.
Reasons noted by the PSC for the lack of  improvement  in  performance  were
the management and leadership of departments, and  the  lack  of  continuity
and the high staff turnover. This was found to  be  one  of  the  underlying
challenges for departments to achieve the necessary stability  required  for
effective policy implementation.

Another important challenge that the  PSC  noted  was  the  limited  use  of
internal monitoring and evaluation by departments.  The  PSC  asserted  that
unless management kept  abreast  of  developments  within  their  respective
departments, intervention could prove difficult when required.

   1. PSC Recommendations

The PSC made the following recommendations, amongst others:

    • Departments need to ensure that poverty reduction  projects  are  well
      managed and implemented in accordance with best management development
      practice. Also, greater  efforts  must  be  made  to  integrate  these
      projects with local processes.

    • The Department of Public  Service  and  Administration  should  assist
      departments with their policy  formulation  process,  especially  with
      regards to public participation. The PSC  has  formulated  guidelines,
      which should be used by departments.

    •  Fraud  Prevention  Plans  aligned  with  department  specific  needs,
      identified during the risk assessment exercises, should be  developed,
      formally adopted and implemented.

    • Departments should develop their  own  department-specific  policy  on
      recruitment  and  selection.  The  PSC  toolkit  on  recruitment   and
      selection can be utilised as a guide in this regard.

    • Departments should put in place  a  strategy  of  prioritising  skills
      development activities to ensure that the activities  that  have  been
      planned are implemented and that the impact of  the  training  on  the
      enhancement of service delivery is assessed.

    • Departments must adhere to the requirements of the  Employment  Equity
      Act (Act 55 of 1998).

4.    Conclusion

The PSC’s findings in the report reflect negatively on the public  service’s
ability to deliver services, and the embodiment of the  nine  basic  values,
as outlined in  Section  195(1)  of  the  Constitution.  There  were  a  few
departments that scored above average and in some  instances  100  per  cent
for  specific  performance  indicators.   The   PSC   made   many   valuable
recommendations in its report. Overall, the Committee was pleased  with  the
report.

   5. Recommendations

It is against the above report that the Committee recommends the following:


   5.1      Guidelines for public participation in policy-making  should  be
      developed by the Department of Public Service and  Administration,  in
      conjunction with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and  the
      Public Service Commission.  Progress  on  this  initiative  should  be
      communicated to Parliament by March 2009 in writing.


   5.2      Departments, as per the PSC  report,  should  put  in  place  a
      strategy of prioritising skills development  activities.  The  Public
      Administration Leadership and Management Academy (PALAMA)  should  be
      consulted by the relevant departments. Progress of the formulation of
      the strategy should be  reported  to  Parliament  by  March  2009  in
      writing.


   5.3      Departments should ensure that planned training  is  implemented
      and that the impact of the training on  the  enhancement  of  service
      delivery is monitored. This should be done in  conjunction  with  the
      Public Administration Leadership  and  Management  Academy  (PALAMA).
      Progress  on  the  implementation  of  planned  training  should   be
      communicated  to  Parliament  by  March  2009  by   the   departments
      identified by the PSC in its M&E Report.
   5.4      A review of the Disciplinary  Codes  and  Procedures  should  be
      done,  with  a  view  of  tightening  enforcement   of   disciplinary
      procedures, specifically related to absenteeism.  The  Department  of
      Public Service and Administration  should  report  to  Parliament  by
      March 2009 on progress made with the review of the disciplinary codes
      and procedures.


   5.5      Dispute resolution time periods, as set out in the  Disciplinary
      Codes  and  Procedures  should  be  adhered  to  by  the  departments
      mentioned in the PSC report. Unresolved disputes should  be  resolved
      as a matter of urgency, and reported to the PSC before March 2009.

   5.6       Members  of  the  Executive  and   Director-Generals   of   the
      departments sampled in the PSC’s Fourth Consolidated M&E Report should
      report to Parliament on  progress  with  implementing  recommendations
      from the above-mentioned report by the end of March 2009.

   7. The PSC should report in writing to Parliament by  the  end  of  March
      2009 on progress with departmental implementation  of  recommendations
      from the Fourth Consolidated Monitoring and Evaluation Report 2007.


   8. The PSC should consider as part of its future M & E reports a  section
      dedicated to Departmental implementation of previous PSC M&  E  report
      recommendations.

Report for be considered.

3.     Report  of  the   Portfolio   Committee   on   Public   Service   and
   Administration on the State of the Public Service Report 2008,  dated  18
   November 2008:

1.    Introduction

The basic values and principles governing public administration are set  out
in the Constitution (Act 108 of 1996)  under  Section  195  (1).  It  states
“Public  administration  must  be  governed  by  the  democratic  principles
enshrined in the Constitution, including the following principles:

        a) A high standard of professional  ethics  must  be  promoted  and
           maintained.
        b) Efficient, economic and  effective  use  of  resources  must  be
           promoted
        c) Public administration must be development orientated.
        d) Services must be provided  impartially,  fairly,  equitably  and
           without bias.
        e) People’s needs must be responded to,  and  the  public  must  be
           encouraged to participate in policy-making.
        f) Public administration must be accountable
        g) Transparency must be  fostered  by  providing  the  public  with
           timely, accessible, and accurate information.
        h) Good human-resource management and career-development practices,
           to maximise human potential, must be cultivated.
        i) Public Administration must  be  broadly  representative  of  the
           South African people, with employment and  personnel  management
           practices based on ability, objectivity, fairness, and the  need
           to  redress  the  imbalances  of  the  past  to  achieve   broad
           representation”.

The State of the Public Service Report is an annual report that is  compiled
from a series of monitoring and evaluation  reports  that  are  periodically
compiled. Each edition of the  report  highlights  progress  and  challenges
faced  in  the  Public  Service,  whilst  simultaneously  re-enforcing   the
principles of accountability and transparency.
The reports also served as an important advocacy and learning  function;  as
the focus on these reports strengthened debates on improving public  service
performance. The report presented was the  seventh  edition  of  the  report
since 2004.

2.    Overview of SOPS report

The committee received a briefing by the Public Service Commission (PSC)  on
the State of the Public Service Report 2008 (SOPS  Report)  on  the  14  May
2008. This report will focus on the  findings  and  recommendations  of  the
SOPS report per constitutional principle.
2.1    A  high  standard  of  professional  ethics  must  be  promoted   and
maintained.

The SOPS  report  highlighted  that  a  range  of  key  policy  instruments,
frameworks  and  commitments  to   several   multi-lateral   anti-corruption
agreements were in place by 2004. After 2004, milestones towards  supporting
and deepening implementation included the  promulgation  of  the  Prevention
and Combating of Corruption  Activities  Act  (Act  12  of  2004),  and  the
development of guidelines on the implementation of the Act.

The National Anti-Corruption  Hotline  (NACH)  was  the  most  visible,  and
collaborative anti-corruption effort since 2004. The  NACH  has  become  the
most widely  used  facility  to  report  acts  of  alleged  corruption.  The
partnership approach  to  anti-corruption  promoted  by  the  National  Anti
Corruption Forum was further strengthened with the adoption in June 2005  of
the National Anti-Corruption Programme.

The post-2004 ethics landscape also witnessed renewed debates  on  conflicts
of  interest  beyond  merely  declaring  potential  conflicts  of  interest.
However, the PSC was disappointed by the  limited  progress  on  the  policy
options it proposed in this area in 2006. An  important  milestone  in  2006
was when South Africa became the eighth country that underwent  a  voluntary
review process through the  African  Peer  Review  Mechanism  in  2006.  Its
institutions and legislation on anti-corruption was commended.

The overall low rate of feedback from departments (36%) regarding  cases  of
alleged corruption was concerning, as this marred the efficacy of the  Anti-
corruption hotline. All departments sampled had not met  the  minimum  anti-
corruption requirements.  The  high  number  of  unresolved  cases  affirmed
perceptions of a  corrupt  Public  Service.  The  PSC  recommended  that  an
investment  of  resources  in  investigative  capacity-building  should   be
prioritised,  as  this  would  progressively   improve   the   standard   of
professional ethics in the public service.

The Financial Disclosure Framework is a mechanism  to  allow  staff  in  the
public service to disclose private interests they have  in  order  to  avoid
conflicts of interests. It was highlighted that the rate of returns for  the
Financial Disclosure Frameworks at 85% fell short of the  100%  return  rate
required. The under reporting, the PSC found  in  terms  of  the  framework,
pointed to poor  political  and  administrative  leadership  which  put  the
Public Service at risk around  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  The  PSC
highlighted that the lack of a national integrity system could  be  a  cause
of this underreporting; the system would take  into  consideration  all  the
current tools that exist to fight corruption, but are not yet aligned.

The PSC recommended that a 100% return rate of Financial Disclosures  should
take place and that unethical conduct be identified and dealt  with.  Policy
gaps around dual employment should also be dealt with.  The  Anti-Corruption
summit taking place in 2008 could serve as a platform for  the  promulgation
of interventions.

2.2   Efficient, economic and effective use of resources must be promoted

The adherence to this principle is difficult to monitor, as it is  difficult
to objectively determine how resources could be effectively and  efficiently
utilised; and  implies  that  productivity  could  be  standardised  without
taking into consideration the current context of a skills shortage that  the
public service  is  in.  The  foundation  for  greater  adherence  with  the
principle was, however laid with the  introduction  of  the  Public  Finance
Management Act (No.  1  of  1999)  (PFMA),  which  deals  specifically  with
measurable and quantifiable resources.
The introduction of nationally  uniform  sector-specific  budget  structures
has helped to simplify  budget  structures  and  facilitate  comparisons  of
performance between provinces after 2004. There was a  reported  shift  from
narrow compliance based performance reporting towards reporting  focused  on
assessment of value delivered. Overall, there has been  a  decrease  in  the
level of under-spending. This suggested that departments were  progressively
overcoming difficulties they experienced with spending their budgets.

A recurring concern over the period under review has been  the  practice  of
unauthorised, irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure. Such  forms  of
expenditure are  not  in  the  interest  of  efficiency,  effectiveness  and
economy. It is also in contravention  of  sections  of  the  Public  Finance
Management Act (No. 1 of 1999).

It was observed that a significant increase  in  the  number  of  misconduct
cases was reported by departments. The number of  cases  reported  was  1042
cases in 2006/7. Section 86 of the PFMA outlines criminal  proceedings  that
should result from offences, and penalties  that  should  be  enforced.  The
cost  of  the  misconduct  reported  amounted  to  R45  million  in  2005/6.
Departments need to ensure that they also increase the  rate  of  recovering
money from officials involved in acts of financial misconduct

The PSC recommends that in  order  to  bring  an  end  to  the  practice  of
unauthorised, fruitless, irregular and  wasteful  expenditure,  departmental
performance management and disciplinary  processes  should  decisively  deal
with unacceptable forms of expenditure.

2.3   Public Administration must be development oriented

The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)  were  promulgated  as  government’s
development agenda after 1994. The MDGs are:
    o Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger;
    o Achieve universal primary education;
    o Promote gender equality AND empower women;
    o Reduce Child mortality;
    o Improve maternal health;
    o Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases;
    o Ensure environmental stability; and
    o Develop a global partnership for development.

Addressing poverty has been a critical objective.  The  economic  growth  of
the country since 2004 has enabled an  increase  in  public  expenditure  by
over 9% per annum since  2004  on  services,  such  as  housing,  education,
income support and primary  health.  The  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme
created 854 406 job opportunities nationally. The programme aimed to  create
1 112 000 jobs by September 2007. This meant that programme achieved  a  77%
implementation rate.

The  introduction  of  no-fee  schools  also  promotes   the   developmental
principle of the public service, with 55,2% of public schools  open  to  the
poor. There has also been a broadening of access to services,  such  as  the
provision of piped water, basic sanitation facilities and  the  delivery  of
subsidised houses. The report found that attention should  be  paid  to  the
infrastructure that government has created to support development.

Approximately 25% of the population benefit from social  grants.  The  rapid
increase in the number of beneficiaries suggests that what was  intended  as
a safety net is becoming an increasingly costly intervention. It  was  found
that this programme’s sustainability was questionable.

Steps have also been taken to develop a  poverty  matrix  for  the  country.
This matrix, however, should not lead to oversimplifications  of  the  lived
experiences  of  the  poor.  PSC  studies  showed  that  active  beneficiary
participation and alignment of projects with local development plans  remain
a  challenge.  The  co-ordination  of  poverty  reduction  programmes   also
remained a challenge. The challenge of inequality also prevails, with intra-
race inequality increasing as poverty is reduced.

The PSC recommended that the work that has been  initiated  to  develop  and
implement a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy should be  accelerated.
Monitoring and evaluation of government’s poverty  reduction  programmes  is
essential to understanding appropriate interventions to  alleviate  poverty.


2.4   Services must be provided impartially, fairly, equitably  and  without
bias

The SOPS report noted that there have been important achievements  for  this
principle.  Inequality between races has dropped to 41%  in  2006,  compared
to 45% in  2004.  Policies  like  Broad  Based  Black  Economic  Empowerment
(BBBEE) have elevated the prospects of previously disadvantage  individuals.
In 2006 mergers and acquisitions of BEE amounted to  15%  of  total  mergers
and acquisitions and  totalled  R56  billion.  However,  there  are  growing
concerns  that  policies  of  this  nature  have  exacerbated   intra-racial
inequality, as only some individuals in a particular race group are able  to
take advantage of the opportunities.

Improvements have also been noted with regard to access to  education,  with
Africans  comprising  60%  of  university  and  university   of   technology
students.

The review of  Institutions  Supporting  Democracy  has  been  an  important
development as it re-enforces and promotes  the  institutions  that  promote
fairness and equity.

The SOPS report noted the efforts to improve compliance to the Promotion  of
Administrative Justice Act (PAJA). Training  was  offered  by  the  Dept  of
Justice and Constitutional Development. However,  after  7  years  it  is  a
concern that progress remains slow and procedures are not adhered  to.  This
may be due to the lack of sanctions for non-  compliance.  This  concern  is
compounded by the fact that very few departments have service  standards  in
place, and when members of  the  public  complain,  redress  mechanisms  are
either not available or are ineffective.
The PSC found that the high investment in  raising  awareness  of  PAJA  and
training for the past seven years  have  not  translated  into  commensurate
improvement  in  how  the  decision-making  is  carried  out.  Of   the   53
departments that the PSC evaluated on PAJA compliance,  it  was  found  that
the  majority  of  departments  were  not  meeting  their  basic  compliance
requirements.

Experience in  the  promotion  of  whistle-blowing  in  the  public  service
suggests that fear of victimisation is an  important  factor  affecting  the
public’s  involvement  in   reporting   allegations   of   corruption.   The
possibility that fear of victimisation  impacts  on  the  implementation  of
PAJA, the SOPS report warns, should not be ignored. More education  for  the
public on their rights is required. It was recommended that  with  awareness
programmes like ‘knowing your  rights’  campaigns,  complaint  channels  and
recourse mechanisms in departments should be functional and operational.

2.5   People's needs must be responded to and the Public must be  encouraged
to participate in policy making

Recently, the service delivery protests  drew  attention  to  the  need  for
public participation in policy making. This showed  that  it  was  necessary
that government-community relations should be  stable  in  the  interest  of
good governance.

Izimbizos, which are government meetings with communities,  have  been  used
to strengthen relations with communities. Although these  meetings  provided
opportunities for communities to communicate directly  with  government,  it
did not allow for government to communicate with communities,  the  progress
of implementing concerns raised at Izimbizos. The lack of a proper  feedback
loop is  a  concern  the  SOPS  report  highlighted.  This  does  not  allow
communities to track the progress or implementation of concerns they  raised
at izimbizos.
Taking into consideration that Government hosted Izimbizos since 2000,  when
it was adopted by Cabinet,  it  does  pose  a  problem  for  monitoring  and
evaluating the implementation of decisions taken at forums like Izimbizos.

The 3000 Community Development Workers were deployed in  2000  participating
municipalities, and play an important  role  in  supporting  communities  to
access government services.  They  also  participate  in  local  development
initiatives, but their impact needs to be monitored.

A recurring problem remains  the  lack  of  guidelines  prescribing  minimum
levels of consultation. This is an important indicator to see how  well  the
public is encouraged to participate in policy-making. Given  the  challenges
of creating a common understanding of participatory governance;  formulating
and implementing minimum guidelines  on  consultation,  by  departments,  is
important.
A recurring challenge is the lack of redress  mechanisms  in  terms  of  the
Batho Pele Principle of Redress. A very small proportion of departments  (3-
5%) rated themselves as excellent in the implementation of this principle.

Since 2003 the PSC completed 4 Citizen Satisfaction surveys and the  average
satisfaction level was 67%, with the Departments of Transport,  Correctional
Services, Home Affairs and Housing receiving  the  lowest  ratings.  It  was
important to look closely at what citizens were  saying  in  these  surveys.
For example only 44% of respondents indicated satisfaction  with  the  crime
reporting services of South African Police Services (SAPS). This means  that
56% of the respondents were not satisfied with the crime  reporting  by  the
SAPS. This implies that the reporting  by  the  SAPS  is  not  satisfactory.
Therefore, when SAPS reports an annual murder rate of  20  000  and  52  000
rapes, the veracity of the figures reported should be questioned.

The SOPS report  recommended  that  Government  should  look  critically  at
strengthening public participation in policy formulation,  with  a  view  of
formulating a policy on how this can be done across departments.

2.6   Public Administration must be accountable

To facilitate accountability various instruments, such as the  Promotion  of
Access to Information Act (PAIA) and PAJA have been put in  place  to  allow
citizens  certain  levels  of  unfettered  access  to  information  held  by
departments.

A key instrument  for  accountability  is  the  Performance  Management  and
Development  System  which,  since  2006,  requires   senior   managers   to
incorporate  all  the  Batho  Pele  principles  into   their   work   plans.
Accountability has also been extended by disqualifying HoDs  from  receiving
financial performance rewards if  their  department  under-  or  over  spend
materially. The development of a Government Wide Monitoring  and  Evaluation
system during the period under review also marked an  important  development
in efforts to improve accountability for performance.

Qualified audit opinions have remained a source of concerns over the  period
under review, with some departments receiving  such  an  opinion  for  fours
years in a row. This goes against the principle  of  an  accountable  public
administration. It also raises questions about the  seriousness  with  which
government’s responsibility of accountability is being taken by  the  public
service.

The PSC report found that there was no reason for  the  cycle  of  qualified
audits and poor performance management not  to  be  broken  decisively.  The
poor use of performance agreements (PAs) as an accountability mechanism  was
also a recurring concern; these agreements were not always entered into,  or
were concluded  late.  In  some  instances,  officials  receive  performance
bonuses without concluding PAs. It was an indictment on  the  Executive  and
Heads of Departments that the completion of  PAs  was  ignored  to  a  point
where the President found it necessary to highlight it in the State  of  the
Nation Address.

The PSC has previously proposed a round-table discussion on  the  challenges
of  effective  implementation  of  the  Performance  Management  Development
System for Heads of Departments.  The  report  recommended  that  a  meeting
should be convened as a matter of urgency. It was further  recommended  that
the use of organisational performance assessment should also  be  considered
to provide further insight into the performance of departments.

2.7   Transparency must be fostered by providing  the  public  with  timely,
accessible and accurate information

The transparent sharing of information enables the public to participate  in
policy making and also assist the public in its  decision-making  about  the
service Government provides. Government’s Programme of Action  is  published
on the government’s website and progress  on  implementation  updated  every
two months. Whilst progress has been made in terms of Annual reports,  there
are still weaknesses with full adherence to the Treasury Guidelines.

Many of the weaknesses in departments are attributed to  the  non-compliance
with policy requirements, such as appointing a Deputy  Information  Officer.
Departments should  appreciate  those  mechanisms  that  promote  access  to
information, which in return also boosts  public  confidence  in  government
institutions.  It  is  also  important  that  Annual  Citizens  reports  are
completed, as required by prescripts. The development  of  Annual  Citizens`
Reports should be something each department commits to. There is  no  reason
why departments  work  plans  and  quarterly  plans  are  not  published  on
department’s websites. This would also assist in making the public aware  of
how departments implement their annual strategic plans.

Public confidence is also influenced by the transparency  and  reporting  on
how government manages the private contributions that members of the  public
offers public servants. Only 4 in 10 departments keep gift registers.

2.8   Good Human resource management and career  development  Practices,  to
maximise Human Potential, must be cultivated

As interpreters and implementers of policy, public servants play a  critical
role in service delivery and their potential should be optimised. There  has
been a shift in the Public service away from past management practices  that
were compliance driven, to  approaches  that  harness  human  potential  and
support good performance. The Accelerated Development Programme is a  useful
initiative, targeting middle managers  from  designated  groups  to  prepare
them for the challenges of functioning in senior  management.  However,  the
programme should be supported and monitored. The Khaedu  training  programme
also  assists  in  keeping  senior  managers  in   touch   with   up-to-date
implementation practices.

A stable environment is required for  effective  Human  Resource  Management
and collective bargaining has been used to reach agreement on a  wide  range
of issues. The massive Public Service strike of 2007 should lead  to  honest
reflection on what went wrong with the process.

The long period of time taken  to  fill  posts  remains  a  challenge.  Line
Managers should also play an active role in Human Resource  management.  The
report recommends that skills development should also be prioritised.

2.9   Public Administration must be  broadly  representative  of  the  South
African People

It  is  important  that  the  Public  Service  mirrors  the  South   African
population in all its diversity.  The  effectiveness  of  measures  such  as
Affirmative Action (AA) needs to be carefully considered  at  this  juncture
as there are debates around whether AA is still necessary and whether it  is
in fact not perpetuating class divisions. The most visible success has  been
the extent to which the Public Service reflects the demographic  composition
of the country. Race  representivity  has  continued  to  improve  with  the
figure for African employees increasing from 74% to 80% in 2007.

Concerns were raised that  departments  have  taken  exceptionally  long  to
conform to gender representivity target of 30%; it has  been  reported  that
it may take longer to reach the revised target of 50% at  Senior  Management
Services level.

The greatest challenge has  been  in  improving  disability  representivity,
which at 1,79% is below the target of 2%. The hearings by the PSC  attempted
to provide an appreciation of the challenges faced  by  departments  in  the
achievement of disability  representivity.  The  development  of  a  central
database  for  people  with  disabilities  should  assist,   and   strategic
partnerships in this regard are important.

To improve gender mainstreaming focus needs to move beyond  numeric  targets
to also consider issues of family  friendly  policies  and  improved  gender
relations in the workplace. It is important  that  representivity  continues
to be monitored. It is also important  that  diversity  management  receives
attention and that efforts to create dynamic,  co-operative  and  productive
work place cultures are enhanced.

3.    The PSC SOPS Roundtable report.

The  Committee  noted  the  excellent  recommendations  and  questions  that
participants at the SOPS roundtable, held earlier this year,  added  to  the
discussion around the report.

Some key questions were  asked  by  Professor  McLennan  in  the  Roundtable
discussion the PSC hosted. The Committee  believes  that  these  discussions
will assist the PSC in its  mandate  to  better  monitor  and  evaluate  the
administrative practices in the Public Service.

4.    Conclusion
The Public Service Commission found that overall,  good  progress  has  been
made  during  the  period  under  review.  However,  there  should   be   an
appreciation of the fact that more needs to be done, and  that  the  quality
and pace of service delivery should be accelerated.

The  Public  Service  has  now  had  sufficient  operational  experience  in
implementing new policies. It is  important  that  effective  monitoring  of
performance  continues  and  that  action  is  taken  where   concerns   are
identified.

5.    Recommendations

It is against the above report that the Committee recommends that:
    • Departments identified  in  the  Public  Service  Commission’s  report
      should implement recommendations made by the Public Service Commission
      in its State of the  Public  Service  Report  2007.  Progress  on  the
      implementation of this recommendation should be reported to Parliament
      by June 2009, in writing.

    • The Public Service Commission  should  report  to  the  Committee  the
      success of Departmental implementation of the recommendations made  in
      its State of the Public Service report, in writing to  Parliament,  by
      June 2009.

Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Minerals  and  Energy  on  the
Minerals and Petroleum  Resources  Development  Amendment  Bill  [B10D-2007]
(National Assembly – sec 75), dated 19 November 2008:
The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
Minerals and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill [B10D-2007]
(National Assembly – sec 75), and the proposed amendments by the National
Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 20
October 2008, p 1972) referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with
amendments [B10E-2008].

5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on  the  Mine
Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B54 - 2008] (National Assembly – sec  75),
dated 19 November 2008:

The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the Mine
Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B54 - 2008], (National Assembly – sec
75), and the proposed amendments by the National Council of Provinces
(Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 24 October 2008, p 2023),
referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B54A – 2008].

6.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development on the Draft Rules of Procedure for  Applications  to  Court  in
terms of the Promotion of Access to Information  Act,  2000  (Act  No  2  of
2000), dated 19 November 2008:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the Draft Rules of Procedure for Applications to Court  in  terms
of the Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000  (Act  No  2  of  2000),
referred to the Committee (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports,  7
April 2008, p 537), recommends that the Draft Rules be approved.

The Committee, however, wishes to make the following additional comments:

These Rules have been outstanding for some  time  and  the  Committee  finds
      this regrettable, as  the  absence  of  these  Rules  impacts  on  the
      effective implementation of the Promotion  of  Access  to  Information
      Act; an Act which lies at the heart of our constitutional democracy.

The Committee is also of the view that the consultation process between  the
      Rules  Board  and  various   stakeholders   could   have   been   more
      comprehensive.  For that reason, the  Committee  will  forward  the  4
      submissions received  (from  ODAC,  the  South  African  Human  Rights
      Commission, Eskom and the South African History Archive) to the  Rules
      Board for its attention.

Given the importance of these Rules and the issues  raised  in  the  various
      submissions, the Committee requires that the Rules Board consider  the
      submissions, review the content and implementation of  the  Rules  and
      report back to the Committee within  6  months  of  the  new  term  of
      Parliament in 2009.

On the procedure to be followed by the Rules  Board  for  the  amendment  or
approval of any Rules, the Committee would suggest that any  discussions  or
consultation around new Rules or amendments to existing  Rules  should  take
place at an earlier stage. In other  words,  that  the  Rules  Board  should
ideally consult various roleplayers and reach agreement  with  the  Minister
of Justice and Constitutional Development  before  formally  submitting  the
Rules to the Minister for  approval.   It  would  also  make  sense  if,  in
future, the Committee was provided with the opportunity to  comment,  albeit
informally, before any amendments to the Rules are tabled in Parliament  for
approval.

Report to be considered.

7.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development on the suspension/removal  from  office  of  Magistrate  X  I  R
Masimini, dated 19 November 2008:
The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report on the suspension/removal from office of Magistrate  X
I  R  Masimini  tabled  by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development in terms of section 13(4)(a) of the Magistrates Act,  1993  (Act
no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

   1. The Portfolio Committee noted from the report tabled by  the  Minister
      for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  that  the  Magistrates
      Commission resolved on 7 March 2008 to recommend that Mr  Masimini  be
      removed from office on the ground of misconduct.
   2. The Portfolio Committee noted that Mr  Masimini  was  convicted  in  a
      court of law of assault with the intent to  do  grievous  bodily  harm
      emanating from an incident at a tavern in the district  of  Ezibeleni.
      He assaulted a woman by pulling her by her hair and hitting her with a
      glass tumbler on her chin, causing an open wound.

   3. The Portfolio Committee further noted that Mr Masimini made a false or
      incorrect statement, when  on  1  November  2006  he  applied  for  an
      appointment to the Regional Court Bench, by failing to disclose in his
      application that there was a criminal case  pending  against  him  and
      that he had appeared as an accused in a court of law.

   4. The Portfolio Committee was advised that Mr Masimini was on a previous
      occasion found guilty of misconduct on three (3) counts in that he had
      used “foul and/or injudicious language in court”,  that  the  Minister
      for Justice and Constitutional Development suspended Mr Masimini  from
      office and that Mr Masimini’s remuneration has been withheld.

   5. The Magistrates Commission resolved to recommend that Mr  Masimini  be
      removed from office in terms of section 13(4)(a)(i) of the Magistrates
      Act.
   6. In terms of section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993,  Parliament
      must, as soon as is reasonably  possible,  pass  a  resolution  as  to
      whether or not the restoration to his or her office of a magistrate so
      suspended is recommended.

   7.  The  Portfolio  Committee  therefore  recommends  that  the  National
      Assembly resolves to pass a resolution not to restore Mr  Masimini  to
      the office as a  Magistrate  in  terms  of  section  13(4)(c)  of  the
      Magistrates Act, 1993.
Report to be considered.

8.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate  A
      Bacharam, dated 19 November 2008:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered  the  report  on  the  provisional  suspension  from  office   of
Magistrate A Bacharam tabled by the Minister for Justice and  Constitutional
Development in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act,  1993  (Act
no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

   1. The Portfolio Committee noted from the report tabled by  the  Minister
      for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  that  the  Magistrates
      Commission resolved on 7 March 2008 to recommend that Ms  Bacharam  be
      provisionally suspended from office in terms of  section  13(3)(a)  of
      the Magistrates Act, 1993.

   2. The Portfolio Committee noted that Ms  Bacharam  has  been  criminally
      charged for defeating or obstructing the Administration of Justice. It
      is alleged that Ms Bacharam was charged for a traffic offence and that
      she was summoned to appear in the  Scottburgh  district  court  on  13
      December 2005. She had an option to pay an admission of guilty fine of
      R300-00 (three hundred rand). On 27 October 2005 she was approached in
      her office by the Sheriff for  service  of  the  summons.  Instead  of
      accepting service of the summons she  called  an  interpreter  to  her
      office and requested her to accept  service  of  the  summons  on  her
      behalf. The interpreter subsequently signed on the return  of  service
      and left Ms Bacharam’s office. On 13 December 2005, the date of trial,
      all traffic summonses were brought before Ms Bacharam. She dealt  with
      the cases, including her own. She herself struck case no  B7309/05  in
      which she was an accused, from  the  roll.  The  case  was  thereafter
      filed. She did not pay the admission of guilt fine.

   3. A misconduct inquiry was set down by the Magistrates Commission for 30
      May 2008. Ms Bacharam’s representative requested a postponement of the
      inquiry pending the finalisation of the criminal case against her.

   4. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993,  Parliament
      must, as soon as is reasonably  possible,  pass  a  resolution  as  to
      whether  or  not  the  provisional  suspension  of  a  magistrate   is
      confirmed.

   5.  The  Portfolio  Committee  therefore  recommends  that  the  National
      Assembly resolves to confirm the provisional suspension of Ms Bacharam
      in terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act.

Report to be considered.

9.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development on the suspension/removal from office of  Magistrate  S  P
      Zwelibanzi, an additional magistrate at Ngqamakhwe, dated 19  november
      2008

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report  on  the  suspension/removal  from  office  of  Mr  SP
Zwelibanzi, tabled by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs  in
terms of section 13(4)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993  (Act  90  of  1993),
reports as follows:

   1. The Portfolio Committee noted from the report tabled by  the  Minister
      of  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,  that  the  Magistrates
      Commission on 22 November 2007 resolved to recommend the removal  from
      office of Mr SP  Zwelibanzi  in  terms  of  section  13(4)(a)  of  the
      Magistrates Act, 1993.

   2. The Portfolio Committee noted that on 19 December 2007 the Minister of
      Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  on   the   basis   of   the
      Commission’s recommendation that he be  removed  from  office  on  the
      ground of misconduct, suspended Mr Zwelibanzi from office in terms  of
      section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act.

   3. The Portfolio Committee further noted that Mr Zwelibanzi was convicted
      of misconduct on  two  previous  occasions  (in  1998  and  2003)  for
      infringements that included unauthorized absence from office,  failure
      to enter results of criminal  trials  in  the  criminal  record  book,
      failure to timeously respond to reviewing judges’ queries and  failure
      to timeously refer a case for  automatic  review.  He  had  also  been
      convicted of driving a motor vehicle whilst intoxicated, and had  been
      suspended from office for a period of  six  (6)  months  by  the  then
      Minister of Justice  and  Constitutional  Development.   At  the  most
      recent misconduct hearing (2007), Mr Zwelibanzi had pleaded guilty  to
      all the charges levelled against him.  He again, on numerous occasions
      absented himself from office without leave or valid cause.

   4. In terms of section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates Act, Parliament  must,
      as soon as is reasonably possible pass a resolution as to  whether  or
      not the restoration of Mr Zwelibanzi to the office  of  magistrate  is
      recommended.

   5. The Portfolio Committee is of the view that Mr Zwelibanzi is not a fit
      and proper person to hold the office  of  magistrate  any  longer  and
      therefore recommends  that  the  National  Assembly  resolves  not  to
      restore Mr Zwelibanzi to his office in terms of  section  13(4)(c)  of
      the Magistrates Act, 1993.

Report to be considered.

10.   Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development on the Magistrates’ Courts: Amendment of  Rules  of  Court
      and  the  Amendment  of  the  Rules  regulating  the  conduct  of  the
      proceedings of the Provincial and Local Divisions of the High Court of
      South  Africa,  in  accordance  with  section  7(c)  of  the  Criminal
      Procedure Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 42 of 2003,  dated  19  November
      2008:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the Magistrates’ Courts: Amendment of  Rules  of  Court  and  the
Amendment of the Rules regulating the conduct  of  the  proceedings  of  the
Provincial and Local Divisions  of  the  High  Court  of  South  Africa,  in
accordance with section 7(c) of the Criminal Procedure Amendment  Act,  2003
(Act No 42 of 2003), recommends that the Rules be approved.

The Portfolio Committee, however,  wishes  to  make  the  following  further
comments:

The Committee regrets the delay in the finalization  of  these  Rules.   The
Committee does accept the explanations given by  the  Rules  Board  and  the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development  and  understands  that
much of the delay has been caused by the procedure that has  been  followed.
The Committee further notes that the Rules Board  and  the  Department  have
determined a less cumbersome procedure in the process of amending  Rules  in
future.

The Committee would  suggest  that,  with  regards  to  the  procedure,  any
discussions and consultation around amendments  to  the  Rules  should  take
place at an earlier stage. In other  words,  that  the  Rules  Board  should
consult various roleplayers and should  ideally  reach  agreement  with  the
Minister  of  Justice  and  Constitutional   Development   before   formally
submitting the Rules to the Minister for approval.

It would also make sense if, in future, the Committee was provided with  the
opportunity to comment, albeit informally,  before  any  amendments  to  the
Rules are tabled in Parliament for approval.

The Committee will also raise the issue of procedure in its exit report  for
the attention of the Committee in the new term of Parliament in 2009.

The Committee wishes to note that the Judicial  Matters  Amendment  Bill  is
likely  to  be  passed  by  Parliament  in  due  course  and  may   possibly
necessitate further amendments to these Rules in future.
Report to be considered.

11.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development on the National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B23B
      - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 19 November 2008:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B23B  -  2008]
(National Assembly – sec 75) and the proposed  amendments  by  the  National
Council of Provinces (Announcements,  Tablings  and  Committee  Reports,  17
November 2008, p 2193) referred to it,  reports  the  Bill  with  amendments
[B23C-2008].
12.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on the South
      African Police Service Amendment Bill [B 30B- 2008] (National Assembly
      – sec 75), dated 19 November 2008:

The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, having considered the South
African Police Service Amendment Bill [B 30B- 2008] (National Assembly -
sec 75) and the proposed amendments of the National Council of Provinces
(Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 17 November 2008, p 2193)
reports the Bill with amendments [B 30C-2008].

13.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on the
      Second Hand Goods Bill [B 2D -2008] (National Assembly – sec 76),
      dated 19 November 2008:

The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, having considered the
Second Hand Goods Bill [B 2D - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76), amended
by the National Council of Provinces and referred to the Committee,
recommends that the Bill not be agreed too.

14.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development on the Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B42B-2008]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 19 November 2008:

The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
considered the Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B42B-2008] (National
Assembly sec 75) and the proposed amendments by the National Council of
Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 18 November 2008,
p 2260), reports the Bill with amendments [B42C-2008].

