---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 11 November 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-11-11
---

TUESDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Ms B L NTEMBE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the NCOP I shall move on behalf of the ID:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that the hon Minister for Provincial and Local Government
         made known on national television the decision to reincorporate
         Khutsong into Gauteng province;


      2) further notes that it is not easy to admit a mistake in the face of
         opposition and to rectify it;
      3) commends the decision taken, which shows that the community is now
         taken into account, after much uproar and running around in the
         streets of Khutsong, to have their voice heard;


      4) marks the timing of the decision, nearer to the time of the
         national elections, in the face of the threat by the community of
         Khutsong that they would not vote.

Mr B J TOLO: On a point of order, Chairperson, this hon member is
misleading the House; that is not what the Minister said. The Minister said
there would be a consultation process. So, the hon member is misleading the
House. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I will study that motion. In terms of the
Rules, I have the right to study the motion. I will study the motion and if
we have to amend it, then we will amend it. I will be in contact with the
member and will also look at the statement which the Minister has made.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Ms Miriam Makeba)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip, I move without
notice:

   That the Council —

   (1)      notes —


       (a)  the sad passing away of the embodiment of our continent’s
           struggle for freedom and heroine of the people of Africa, Miriam
           Makeba, who was born in Johannesburg on 4 March 1932 and died at
           the age of 76 after a concert in Italy;

       (b)  that for more than half a century Mama Africa, as she was
           affectionately known around the world, became ‘‘mother of our
           struggle’’ and ‘‘South Africa’s ﬁrst lady of song’’ who brought
           the intricate rhythms of her protests against the apartheid
           regime to millions of listeners around the world and remained
           our country’s spokeswoman against the brutality of the apartheid
           government;


       (c)  also that Mama Africa was forced to go into exile in 1960 when
           South Africa banned her from returning to her birth country as
           she was deemed to be ‘‘too dangerous’’ and a ‘‘communist
           revolutionary who was galvanising the world’’ against the then
           white apartheid government of South Africa;


       (d)  that Mama Africa was a legend who, for many years, preached
           peace, compassion and goodwill through her music and continued
           to inform the people of the world about the brutality of the
           apartheid regime and its forces;

       (e)  her exceptional personal and artistic proﬁle, which embodied her
           creative spirit borne out of love for her country and the
           determination for a better South Africa which has earned her
           many accolades and the hearts of many people across the world,
           making Miriam Makeba a living legend; and


     2) takes this opportunity to convey to the Makeba family and the music
        fraternity its deepest condolences and wishes them strength in this
        trying and difficult moment.


   May her soul rest in peace and her music and loving memory console
   us!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr O M THETJENG: On a point of order: Just on a point of correction, when
he read the date of birth it sounded as if he said “1982”. If that is the
case, we request that it be corrected. But if what is written reflects the
correct year, it will be fine. I’m not objecting to the motion, but I just
want to check if the year that he gave is correct.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I did not say 1980 or whatever the hon member
mentioned. I’ve got it in writing here in front of me.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: So the correct thing is in the motion. Thank
you.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 ELECTION OF SENATOR BARACK OBAMA AS FIRST AFRICAN-AMERICAN PRESIDENT OF THE
                                     USA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council —

  (1) notes the election of a son and hero of African descent, Senator
        Barack Obama as the ﬁrst African-American President and the 44th
        President of the United States of America;


  (2) acknowledges that this is a landmark in the history of the world,
        which ushers in the beginning of a new era for the political
        landscape in the United States and globally;


  (3) shares the optimism of world leaders in general, and African leaders
        in particular that under the leadership of President Obama the
        United States government will continue to inspire and work alongside
        leaders in the international community in addressing all the major
        issues of concern to humanity, especially those relating to peace
        and security and the ﬁght against poverty, hunger and poor health;
        and


   (4)      takes this opportunity to convey the sincerest congratulations
        of the people of South Africa to president-elect Barack Obama for
        standing tall on the shoulders of the world, and our renewed
        assurance to work together with the people of the United States for
        a better and safe world.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     ALLEGATIONS OF TENDER FRAUD IN DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B L NTEMBE: Chairperson, I move without notice, as follows:

   That the Council –


     1) notes that allegations of tender fraud in Correctional Services in
        the amount of R200 million were reported by the Sunday papers of 9
        November 2008;
     2) further notes that according to our laws no one is guilty until
        proven guilty;


     3) expresses concern that unless an investigation is launched into the
        allegation, it will be believed; and


    4) therefore calls for an investigation into the matter to satisfy all
       South Africans as to whether the allegations are true or not, and for
       the outcome of such investigation to be published.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] In the light of the objection the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of
motion.

              NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson and
hon members who are with us today, we know that when we make laws it is a
journey. It is a journey that we have to walk, along with the citizens of
our country, and the destination is when we implement that law and it
changes the lives of people.

As we implement, we start realising that there are some gaps here and some
weaknesses there and then we have to correct things. That is what is being
addressed by our Constitution.

In order to give effect to the constitutional right to a safe environment,
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism reviewed environmental
legislation in 1996. The review resulted in the development and
promulgation of the National Environmental Management Act of 1998, Nema, as
the overarching framework legislation for environmental management.

Chapter 5 of Nema introduced the framework for integrated environmental
management and the enabling mechanism for replacing the environmental
impact assessment regulations, which had been introduced in 1997 through
provisions of the Environment Conservation Act of 1989.

Although titled “integrated environmental management”, the scope and
provisions included in the Act of 1998 very much limited integrated
environmental management to one tool only, the environmental impact
assessment, EIA. During 2006 the drive towards a more efficient and
effective environmental impact management system for South Africa was
initiated.

This project of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
together with our provincial partners, aims not only to rationalise the use
of EIAs, but to introduce a system truly based on integrated environmental
management. This system will include a streamlined EIA process; the
introduction of tools other than the EIA for environmental management;
improved co-operation and co-ordination between the organs of state; an
integrated environmental authorisation process; and bringing all economic
activities, including mining, into one central environmental management
system.

As a first step in this regard, in 2006 Nema-based EIA regulations were
promulgated. Although improving on many of the deficiencies identified
through the implementation of the former EIA system, that is, the EIA
regulations of 1997, many of the mechanisms to streamline EIAs could not be
introduced as the principal Act either by implication prohibited it, or did
not enable such provisions in subordinate legislation. It accordingly
became evident that amendments to the principal Act were required.

The amendments referred to above were subjected to a long and extensive
consultation process, first through the process run by the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, and then through publication by
Parliament in August 2007, followed by public hearings and various
deliberations by the portfolio committee responsible for environmental
affairs and tourism. That is why I said that it is a long journey that we
have to walk together.

After this extensive process the portfolio committee is satisfied that the
amendments introduced through this Bill are, firstly, necessary; secondly,
will greatly improve the efficiency of EIAs and other future tools without
compromising on effective environmental management, and lastly will bring
mining into the environmental management system governed by the National
Environmental Management Act in a pragmatic way.

In terms of improved efficiency, this is achieved in four ways: firstly,
the introduction of enabling provisions to introduce new and often more
appropriate tools; secondly, provisions for exclusions and exemptions based
on set criteria; thirdly, provisions for improved co-ordination and co-
operation between government institutions; and fourthly, provisions for
integrating environmental or related authorisation processes.

These provisions are critical to address, in a responsible manner, the
various development initiatives emanating from the Accelerated and Shared
Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, and are also specifically
important at this point to address the various interventions required to
implement the electricity response plan. These include the ability to
manage and control impacts through norms and standards, to prescribe
requirements through guidelines and to issue integrated environmental
authorisations, to mention just a few of the opportunities that the
amendment will offer if and when enacted.
This improved efficiency can, however, not be at the cost of effective
environmental management and the protection of the environmental rights
enshrined in the Constitution. To ensure effectiveness in this more
efficient system, the amending Bill introduces various checks and balances.
They include, amongst other things, minimum requirements for environmental
authorisations, qualifying any discretion that the Minister or competent
authority may have, and limiting exclusions and exemptions to certain
provisions of the Act only and subjecting them to meeting strict criteria.
In addition, provisions around public participation have been strengthened
substantially.

The Bill further enables co-operative governance by introducing mechanisms
for various types and levels of co-operation agreements and, through
recognising other regulatory processes, the current situation of regulatory
duplication in some instances can now be avoided.

Chair, a fundamental shift in the amendment is the introduction of the
environmental authorisations, not only as the outcome of an EIA or any of
the potential new processes introduced by Chapter 5, but also applicable to
the authorisation, licensing, or permitting processes emanating from any of
the specific environmental management Acts, for example the National
Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, the National Environment
Management: Air Quality Act, and the National Environmental Management:
Waste Management Bill.

This, in turn, enables integrated environmental authorisations. In other
words, a developer that currently may require two or more different
authorisations from the environmental authority will, in future, be able to
obtain all authorisations through a single process instead of going from
pillar to post.

The Bill, however, also goes further and enables integrating authorisation
processes with other government regulatory processes such as planning,
water, heritage-related permits, permissions or authorisations.

This aspect of the amendment then brings me to what I believe is a major
and important achievement of the law reform process, the inclusion of
mining in the Nema environmental impact management regime. Mining was
introduced in the 2006 EIA regulations after the Minister of Minerals and
Energy granted consent that it be listed as an activity to be subjected to
EIA.

This consent was, however, conditional. The conditions included that such
inclusion may not result in a duplication of regulatory requirements and
that the Minister of Minerals and Energy must retain mandates given to her
through the enactment of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development
Act of 2002.

Environmental management for mining was regulated by the Mineral and
Petroleum Resources Act and its regulations in a manner that is in many
ways similar to that provided for in the National Environmental Management
Act. It must be emphasised, however, that there are also important
differences. Bringing mining activity in the EIA regulations into effect
would have resulted in the duplication of regulatory requirements and so
the conditions stipulated by the Minister could, accordingly, not be met as
long as the status quo in terms of the legislative framework was in place.

Various attempts have been made in early drafts of the Bill to address this
dilemma, including assigning competence to the Minister of Minerals and
Energy for implementation of Nema and relying on the co-operative
governance mechanisms mentioned above to deal with the duplication.

During the consultation process and deliberations in the committee, both
the portfolio committee and the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism were of the view that this was not a satisfactory solution as there
would, in fact, still be two statutes governing environmental impact
management and, accordingly, two impact management systems.

After intensive negotiations at various levels an agreement was reached,
first between the relevant Ministers and later in Parliament, that
environmental impact management should be governed by Nema only and that
the provisions in the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act, in
this regard, must be transferred to and contextualised in Nema.

For pragmatic reasons, it was further agreed that the system will be
implemented by the Department of Minerals and Energy for an 18-month
period, after which it will revert to the environmental authority. Bill 36D
of 2007 gives effect to this agreement. The Mineral and Petroleum Resources
Development Act provisions not already contained in Nema, and that are
considered to be strengthening environmental management of mining and other
activities, have been adapted and adopted. This includes provisions around
rehabilitation, closure, financial provisions, monitoring and reporting and
environmental management programmes. Integration of environmental and
mining authorisations has also been provided for.

The Bill specifies the rules and responsibilities of both Ministers. The
Minister of Minerals and Energy is the implementing agent and will for the
18-month period consider and grant or refuse applications for environmental
authorisation related to mining. The granting of such environmental
authorisation is conditional for the granting of a mining-related permit,
licence, authorisation or permission.

The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism will be responsible for
legislation, regulations, policies, strategies and guidelines related to
environmental impact management for all activities, including mining and
will, in addition, be the appeal authority for environmental authorisation
granted or refused for mining activities by the Minister of Minerals and
Energy.

The enactment of the Bill will, for the first time since environmental
impact management was introduced in South Africa, bring mining into the
system that is governing all other identified activities. Mining will, for
the first time, require environmental authorisation which is not only part
of a mining licence, permit, right, etc, but is an authorisation in its own
right that can be refused or appealed, and is enforceable through the very
strong enforcement provisions of Nema.

The environmental authorisation and the process to obtain it must adhere to
the requirements of Nema. At the same time, this authorisation can, in
terms of the process, be integrated with the mining authorisation process
to ensure efficiency.

Additional requirements for mining houses as a result of the amendment are
minimal but necessary, as it relates to weaknesses in the mineral and
petroleum resources development system. It relates to issues such as public
participation and consideration of alternatives. It should, however, be
mentioned that the bringing into effect of the listing of the 2006 EIA
regulations would have had the same effect and these requirements should
accordingly have been anticipated since 2006.

In conclusion, the amending Bill radically improves the environmental
impact management system of South Africa. Many of these improvements can be
implemented with immediate effect and are eagerly awaited to address
current pressing issues such as infrastructure development emanating from
the electricity crisis. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, hon members, the National
Environmental Management Act is now being amended to refine the integrated
environmental management system in order to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the system. The Bill proposes new enabling provisions that
make it possible for environmental management instruments, other than
environmental impact assessments, to be introduced.

The Bill also seeks to provide for agreement between organs of state in
order to enable them to align regulatory processes. The Bill provides
enabling provisions in order to allow a process, conducted in terms of
another regulatory system, to be used as a basis for granting environmental
authorisations in terms of the Act. The Bill again proposes that the
integrated environmental authorisation may be issued where different Acts
regulate the same activity or where multiple authorisations require a
similar process.

In order to give effect to the general objectives of integrated
environmental management, as laid down in this Act, the potential
consequences for or impact on the environment of listed activities or
specified activities must be considered, investigated, assessed and
reported on to the competent authority.

Consultation between competent authorities and consideration of legislative
compliance is important. The Minister or MEC may consult with any organ of
state administering the legislation relating to any aspect of any activity
that also requires environmental authorisation under this Act in order to
co-ordinate the respective requirements of such legislation and to avoid
duplication. The Minister or MEC, in giving effect to Chapter 3 of the
Constitution and section 24(4)(a)(i) of this Act, may after consultation
with the organ of state contemplated in subsection (1) enter into a written
agreement with the organ of state in order to avoid duplication in the
submission of information, or the carrying out of a process relating to any
aspect of any activity that also requires environmental authorisation under
this Act.

We are happy that there is an alignment of environmental authorisation in
this Bill. If the carrying out of a listed activity or specific activity
contemplated in section 24 is also regulated in terms of another law or a
specific environmental management Act, the authority empowered under that
other law or specific environmental management Act to authorise that an
activity and the competent authority empowered under Chapter 5 to issue an
environmental authorisation in respect of that activity, may exercise their
respective powers jointly by issuing separate authorisation or an
integrated environmental authorisation.

South Africa needs an effective environmental management programme that
will speed up development in all sectors. The Minister of Minerals and
Energy, MEC or identified competent authority may require the submission of
an environmental management development programme before considering an
application for an environmental authorisation. The environmental
management development programme must contain information on any proposed
management, mitigation, protection or measures that will be undertaken to
address the environmental impact that has been identified in a report
contemplated in subsection 24(1A), including environmental impacts in
respect of planning and design, preconstruction and construction
activities. The rehabilitation of the environment is extremely important.

The environmental management programme must set out time periods in which
the measures contemplated in the environmental management programme must be
implemented. It must also contain measures regulating responsibilities for
any environmental damage, pollution, pumping and treatment of extraneous
water or ecological degradation as a result of prospecting or mining
operations. The applicant must inform his or her employees of any
environmental risk which may result from their work and risks must be dealt
with in order to avoid pollution or the degradation of the environment. We
support the amending Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, Deputy Minister, hon members, with all
developments, particularly in a growing economy like ours where the state
is a major role-player in infrastructure developments, environmental
management is not an optional extra. This is even more so when much of
these developments are aimed at correcting past economic and
infrastructural imbalances in the rural areas of our country.

In the rural areas the environment has, until recently, remained untouched
and unspoiled. The rapid expansion of mining in rural areas in recent years
has, however, caused an even greater impact on the environment which cannot
be allowed to continue unchecked.

The National Environmental Management Amendment Bill introduces a range of
new environmental management instruments which must be welcomed. These
include norms and standards and environmental management frameworks, all of
which, if the associated regulations are drafted in good faith, will speed
up approvals for appropriate developments without compromising the
environment. It is pleasing to know that the portfolio committee accepted
the DA’s proposal to have the associated regulations for the environmental
instruments brought back to Parliament for oversight after the Minister has
drafted them.

The DA’s spokesperson on environmental affairs, hon Gareth Morgan, has
already dealt with much of the detail of the Bill as passed by the NA;
therefore, I will refrain from going down that path. I am happy that the
process in the NCOP has been thorough and that the further amendments
introduced by the C version of the Bill and incorporated into the National
Environmental Management Amendment Bill, Bill 36D of 2007, go further in
strengthening the role of environmental assessment, particularly with
regard to prospecting, mining and exploration.

I do believe, however, that the role of the Minister of Minerals and Energy
should have been diluted rather than strengthened in regard to
environmental assessment. That job is the job of Environmental Affairs and
that is where it should be.

A very positive amendment is the insertion of the new subsection 24N(1A)
which makes the submission of an environmental management programme
compulsory in regard to prospecting, mining, exploration, reduction and
related activities before an application for an environmental authorisation
is considered.

I have said that I am happy that the process in the NCOP has been thorough.
Also, I still feel that public hearings in the provinces in general should
indeed still be directed at the people at large but that closer interaction
with the industries and stakeholders involved should be sought. This is an
area that needs serious attention, but it must go hand in hand with the
proper redetermination of the NCOP cycle in regard to section 76
legislation.

The massive influx of legislation experienced this past year is not
conducive to the formulation of good legislation. On the contrary, it is
counterproductive and should never have been allowed. We are guilty of
passing rushed laws which cannot be good for democracy.

The DA supported the passing of the Bill in the NA and now supports the
provinces in passing the amendments of the NCOP. I thank you.

Ms Y NAHARA (KwaZulu-Natal): Thank you, Chairperson. The amendments made by
the department do not need an explanation. If I could have done it my way,
I would not have come here. The Deputy Minister, the hon Mabudafhasi, has
given a very clear and thorough explanation as to where we are heading and
what we want to do.

Hon Moatshe has given all the reasons why this Bill had to be amended, but
just to make an input, I would like to say two things about the amendments.
The first point concerns the provisions that the Bill seeks to address,
namely to refine the integrated environmental management systems in order
to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the system. The second point
concerns the proposal that the integrated environmental authorisation be
issued where different Acts provide for regulation and where multiple
authorisation is required.

This is so important that I cannot emphasise it enough. From my personal
experience, we needed these provisions yesterday. This will address one of
the main problems, namely the delays in the EIAs that we experience in the
provinces as well as many other issues concerning the environment.

You will find that there are accusations made by developers that this
government is not serious about development. There is also conflict with
our own small businesspeople who are unable to get the necessary
authorisation in time. Project managers end up losing the very same jobs
that we want to create for our people to the big developers or
businesspeople who have the money to go to the private sector to do these
assessments. As a result it has reduced the number of construction
developers that we could have had by now.

It has also affected some of our people who have inherited land and who
have wanted to do something different from agriculture or farming and who
would have preferred to have community game reserves and other initiatives.
To date, some of them did not achieve their goals because of the delays of
the EIA and all the relevant issues. One cannot really overemphasise the
need for these amendments to take place.

Having made this point, I would just like to say one thing about the
previous speaker who said that he is happy that the portfolio committee has
taken their proposals from the DA. I am not sure whether the speaker is
correct. As the provinces we held public hearings and I can assure you
that, as a chairperson in KwaZulu-Natal, I spoke to our own people who were
talking about these issues.

I doubt that the DA is actually our teacher because our people know what
they want and we were sure about what we wanted to amend. As I stand here,
I can assure you the people in Nongoma know why I am here and they know why
these amendments have to be made. I normally do not like to be told that
someone did something for me, when I can do it myself.

Other than this, I really would not be doing justice to the matter after
the chairperson, hon Moatshe, has explained the various issues that are so
important to this Bill. The KwaZulu-Natal committees, both agriculture and
provincial NCOP, met and considered the public hearing proposals and we
included those we felt should be included. We deliberated extensively on
this Bill and we ended up agreeing that we support this Bill fully with all
the amendments. Let me end by saying that wherever you find “imbokotho”
[rock], you have no doubt that things will go right. I thank the hon
Minister.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, we in South Africa, as in many developing
countries and emerging economies, have to strike an equitable and workable
balance between our many developmental needs and objectives and the
preservation and protection of our environment.

If we are to achieve the high economic growth rates needed to prosper and
free many of our people from the poverty in which they are now trapped, our
environment will most definitely suffer and bear the brunt of our increased
activity if we do not take the necessary measures to try to protect it.

It is for this reason that we must ensure that issues concerning our
environment are taken seriously and that there is legislation in place to
provide protection for the environment and ensure its sustainability.

The National Environmental Management Act provides for the overarching
legislative framework for environmental governance in South Africa. There
was widespread support for this Act, which has transformed the landscape of
our environmental legislation.

The Bill before us today proposes a number of amendments to the principal
Act which will strengthen it and ensure that objectives are reached. This
Bill will also improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the integrated
environmental management system by, amongst other things, moving away from
the environmental impact assessment as the only environmental assessment
tool, and enhancing environmental co-operation and co-ordination where an
activity falls under the jurisdiction of more than one organ of state.

In a dynamic environment it is imperative that we are aware of the many
changes and developments that occur and ensure that the necessary
amendments are made to our legislation to ensure that it is still effective
and able to achieve the objectives for which it was enacted.

The National Environmental Management Amendment Bill will do just that, and
the amendments proposed will ensure that issues concerning our environment
are given the attention they deserve. However, the deletion of “committee”
and “forum” and replacing them with “the Minister may establish a forum or
advisory committee”, all by himself or herself, may be a point of concern.
We are human beings and it is always wiser to work with people in
committees or forums, rather than giving all the powers to the Minister to
determine the committees or the forum that may assist with this job.

This is what the IFP has to say to you and the world. [Interjections.]
Thank you very much.

Mr W M DOUGLAS: Chairperson and hon members, the National Environmental
Management Amendment Bill constitutes framework legislation for the
fulfilment of responsibilities contained in section 24 of the Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa, and I quote:

   Everyone has the right –


     a) to an environment that is not harmful to their health or wellbeing;
        and
     b) to have the environment protected, for the benefit of present and
        future generations ...

The ACDP is delighted that what started out as a major concern in the
mining industry in 2006 over unwarranted delays in the processing of
environmental impact assessments, or EIAs, has now at last been resolved.

The National Environmental Management Amendment Bill created such a
hullabaloo mainly because it attempts to resolve one of South Africa’s
leading “green” problems, which is mitigating the impact of prospecting and
mining, particularly in highly sensitive areas such as wetlands.
We have this Bill today as the result of an agreement between the Minister
of Minerals and Energy and the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism on the subject of which department is to be responsible for mining-
related environmental issues.

Also, an agreement was reached that the wording of the National
Environmental Management Act, Nema, and other related environmental
legislation was to be likewise amended as far as it was linked to mining
and exploration issues in the same context.

Furthermore, the ACDP is pleased that both Ministers have at last agreed
that there should be one environmental management system and that this
system should be prescribed by the environmental authority. The Minister of
Minerals and Energy had an existing mandate in terms of environmental
management for mining and this must be retained, and the Minister of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism was the custodian of the environment and
must be enabled to fulfil this function, also in terms of mining.

The ACDP is fully satisfied that this Bill addresses the issues of the main
problems facing this industry and we support this Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, can I just remind you that
it is unparliamentary for any member to take a nap in this House or even to
sleep. I may be bound to name some names if I catch you doing that.
[Interjections.]

Me E PRINS (Wes-Kaap): Dankie, Voorsitter. Ek is bewus van die besorgdhede
wat geopper is deur die verskillende rolspelers met betrekking tot die
Wysigingswetsontwerp op Nasionale Omgewingsbestuur. Ek glo nogtans dat
hierdie wet ’n goeie raamwerk voorsien om ons gemeenskappe se grondwetlike
regte, let wel, in die volgende opsigte, te beskerm: die reg tot ’n
omgewing wat nie ons gesondheid en lewe bedreig nie; die reg dat ons
omgewing deur redelike wetgewing en ander relevante maatstawwe beskerm word
in soverre dit besoedeling en ekologiese verval betref; die reg dat
omgewingsbewaring bevorder moet word en dat daar seker gemaak word dat
volhoubare ekologiese ontwikkeling geskied; die reg dat natuurlike
hulpbronne so benut word dat dit in lyn is met regverdigbare ekonomiese en
maatskaplike ontwikkeling.

Die volgende punte het betrekking: die wet rasionaliseer die gebruik van
“Environmental Impact Assessments” - omgewingsimpakstudies - deur meer
buigbaarheid te skep in die aansoek van EIA prosesse. Baie rolspelers
beskou die uitbreiding van diskresionêre magte van owerhede as die
afwatering van omgewingsbestuurbeginsels. Dit word erken dat diskresionêre
besluitneming ’n hoër vlak van verantwoordlikheid vereis, maar ek glo dit
is haalbaar.

In ’n ontwikkelende land het ons meer verfynde EIA prosesse nodig. Die
wysigingswetsontwerp poog om hierdie buigbaarheid te voorsien, veral in die
manier waarop daar met die minimum vereistes in artikel 24(4) gehandel
word, en in die uitbou van ’n vrystellingsbepaling in artikel 24M.

Die daarstelling van geïntegreerde bepalings om samewerking te verseker,
soos vervat in artikel 24K, en samespanning van besluitneming soos vervat
in artikel 24L, word gesteun. Deur die voorsiening van ’n bepaling wat
ander regulerende prosesse erken, kan duplisering van regulering in sekere
gevalle aangespreek word. Dit word nogtans erken dat die praktiese
implementering van hierdie bepalings op ’n verantwoordelike manier gedoen
moet word, met die beskerming van die omgewing as die eerste prioriteit.

Die daarstelling van geïntigreerde omgewingsgoedkeurings is ’n positiewe
stap. Hierdeur word verseker dat omgewingsgoedkeurings nie uitgereik word
wat slegs op EIAs gebaseer is nie, maar ook in oorleg met
lisensiëringsprosesse voortspruitend uit enige van die
omgewingsbestuurwette, byvoorbeeld, die wet op biodiversiteit, die National
Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act.

Dit verseker ook geïntegreerde goedkeuringsprosesse met ander
regeringsregulerende prosesse soos beplanning, water, erfenis-verwante
permitte, ens.

Dit word weereens vereis dat die praktiese implementering van hierdie
bepaling op ’n verantwoordelike manier gedoen word.

Die wysigingswetsontwerp bevat steeds sekere maatstawwe wat noodsaaklik is
vir ’n effektiewe en genoegsame impakbeheerstelsel. Dit sluit in die
minimum vereistes vir omgewingsgoedkeurings, waardeur gekwalifiseer word
dat enige diskresie wat die Minister of enige bevoegde owerheid mag hê, aan
streng kriteria onderhewig is.

Die invoeging van publieke deelname as ’n vereiste vir alle EIAs is van
kardinale belang. Dit sal verseker dat alle rolspelers goed ingelig is oor
omgewingsregte. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Ms E PRINS (Western Cape): Thank you, Chairperson. I am aware of the
concerns that were raised by the different role-players in respect of the
National Environmental Management Amendment Bill. I, nevertheless, believe
that this legislation provides a good framework to protect the
constitutional rights of our communities, please note, in the following
respects: the right to an environment which does not endanger our health
and lives; the right to have our environment protected by reasonable
legislation and other relevant measures insofar as pollution and ecological
degradation are concerned; the right to promotion of conservation of the
environment and to ensure that sustainable ecological development takes
place; and the right to natural resources being utilised in such a way that
it is in line with equitable economic and social development.

The following points refer: the Bill rationalises the use of environmental
impact assessments by creating more flexibility in the application of EIA
processes. Many role-players regard the expansion of discretionary powers
of authorities as the dilution of environmental management principles. It
is acknowledged that discretionary decision-making requires a higher level
of responsibility, but I believe it is achievable.

In a developing country we need more refined EIA processes. The amending
Bill attempts to provide this flexibility, especially in the manner in
which the minimum requirements are dealt with in section 24(4), and in the
development of an exemption provision in section 24M.

The creation of integrated provisions to ensure co-operation, as contained
in section 24K, and co-operative decision-making as contained in section
24L, is supported. By way of the provision of a clause which acknowledges
other processes, the duplication of regulation in certain cases can be
addressed. It is, nevertheless, acknowledged that the practical
implementation of these provisions must be done in a responsible manner,
with the protection of the environment as the first priority.

The creation of integrated environmental authorisations is a positive step.
This ensures that environmental authorisations which are based on EIAs only
are not issued, but that consideration is also given to licensing processes
arising from any of the environmental management Acts, for example, the Act
dealing with biodiversity, the National Environmental Management:
Biodiversity Act.

It also ensures integrated authorisation processes with other government
regulatory processes like planning, water, heritage-related permits, etc.

It is once again required that the practical implementation of this
provision takes place in a responsible manner.

The amending Bill still contains certain measures which are essential for
an effective and adequate impact control system. These include the minimum
requirements for environmental authorisations, whereby the qualification is
made that any discretion which the Minister or any competent authority
might have, be subject to strict criteria.

The inclusion of public participation as a requirement for all EIAs is of
cardinal importance. This will ensure that all role-players are well
informed about environmental rights.]

The introduction of tools other than EIAs for environmental management is a
positive step. This will alleviate the unfortunate pressure that has been
placed on the EIA tool to address all impacts in all instances. For
example, we are looking forward to the use of norms and standards as an
option to reduce the need for EIAs in instances where EIAs are overkill.

The stronger linkage that has been created between forward-planning tools
and EIAs is another positive amendment. In the Western Cape we believe that
effective land use and environmental planning and management, inclusive of
EIAs, must be integrated to ensure effective promotion of sustainable
development. This is emphasised by the fact that we have amalgamated
environmental management and planning into a single department in the
Western Cape.

One of the most significant aspects of the amending Bill, and probably the
reason for the lengthy law reform process, is the inclusion of mining under
the Nema umbrella. To me it makes perfect sense that mining, as one of the
major industries responsible for physical land transformation, should be
measured against the same standards as all other development activities.
Challenges, however, will now be for the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism and the Department of Minerals and Energy to
consistently implement the amending Bill. Future challenges to ensure
effective co-operation and alignment will be enormous and this law reform
process is only the first step. Thank you.
Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chairperson, it’s quite interesting that the IFP is
speaking to the world. I’m not sure whether they have turned into an
international NGO, but I doubt if countries like Cuba will take what the
IFP is saying seriously because they know that the ruling party is the ANC.
When the ruling party of any country speaks people tend to listen
carefully.

Hon Chairperson, as I was coming here, the hon Watson gave me a sweet – I’m
not sure whether his intention was to try and sweeten my speech on the
debate as such. So far there’s nothing political which I heard him
mentioning today other than to repeat what their leaders are saying in the
NA.

Suffice it to say that when we are dealing with this kind of legislation we
take our mandate from our provinces, and I think what they’ve raised was
not a matter of saying that this House must just rubber-stamp what is being
said in the NA.

But it must be mentioned that prior to 1994 South Africa was characterised
by the lack of a sound environmental and natural resource management
legislative and policy framework.

The protection, management and preservation of the environment and natural
resources were regarded as unnecessary responsibilities that were left
fragmented and scattered in a number of government departments. This
resulted in enormous environmental degradation and the appalling state of
our country’s wealth of natural resources.

As many of our people were shifted to reserves and battled the scourge of
underdevelopment and poverty that characterised many of the areas where our
people lived, poor communities, particularly black township residents,
found themselves constructing informal settlements on toxic dumps.

In many instances, solid waste became part of the permanent features of
many of these communities. Many rural dwellers found themselves without
land for grazing or tilling as a result of soil erosion and deforestation.
These things became the order of the day.

One of the main tasks of the ANC after the 1994 elections, as we embarked
upon a sustainable and environmentally friendly growth and development
path, was to ensure that the protection of a healthy and safe environment
becomes one of our highest priorities, as it is a crucial resource that we
have to preserve for the next generation. We then said that in order to do
that we have to protect our natural environment and enact a new generation
of environmental legislation, which will not only protect our natural
resources but also preserve them for generations to come.

We committed ourselves to ensuring that the broad objective of our
environmental policy and national legislation - based on the principle of
sustainability and preservation of our natural resources - is in line with
our commitment to participatory democracy, which, of course, includes
public hearings. We said that the government must encourage the inclusion
of all people and groups who are interested in or affected by environmental
governance in order to ensure that participation is fair and effective.

We have also committed ourselves to establishing mechanisms and processes
to ensure public participation in environmental governance, which will
ensure the realisation of some of the things the Deputy Minister has
alluded to. I will not waste your time, Deputy Chairperson and hon members,
by repeating what the Deputy Minister has said. I think everyone was
listening attentively except a member, of course, whom I might have
disturbed in his or her sleep when I raised my voice!

Mr Douglas also referred to the constitutional clause which ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Windvoël, can I
just call you to order, please. There are some members who are conversing
very loudly; you are disturbing the speaker. You may continue. That’s Rule
32, thank you.

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson. It might happen
that it is those who have ulterior ambitions of becoming an alternative
government. But if you have such ulterior ambitions, you must begin to
behave very well. Start here in the House so that people out there may
believe you.

I was just referring to what Mr Douglas quoted with regard to the
Constitution. In terms of the Constitution, in Chapter 2 in the Bill of
Rights it states:

  Everyone has the right -

     a) to an environment that is not harmful to their health or wellbeing;
        and


     b) to have the environment protected, for the benefit of present and
        future generations, through reasonable legislative and other
        measures ...

such as this piece of legislation we are dealing with today.

As we stand on the threshold of our third democratic order, as the ANC we
stand before our people with great pride that our nation is still on course
with the commitment to strengthen our collective and individual
responsibilities in managing, protecting and preserving our country’s
environment.

It is in that light that the National Environmental Management Amendment
Bill emulates and reasserts our movement’s commitment to closing any gaps
in realigning our environmental responsibilities, policies, programmes,
etc. It clearly articulates our commitment to continue to seek more ways
and strategies to relentlessly deal with the past environmental injustices
and to ensure that our country is set on a path of sustainable development
and environmental management.

Also, it is in that vein that the Bill before us today seeks to amend the
National Environmental Management Act of 1998. The Deputy Minister also
alluded to some of the matters which these amendments are trying to deliver
to the country at large. I will not repeat what the Deputy Minister has
said.

To conclude, I must say that as the ANC we take pride in this Bill as it is
in line with the following three principles that form the cornerstone of
our policy to protect our natural resources.

Firstly, environmental management must place people and their needs at the
forefront of its concern and serve their physical, psychological,
developmental, cultural and social interests equitably.

Secondly, development must be socially, environmentally and economically
sustainable.

Thirdly, sustainable development requires the consideration of all relevant
factors including, amongst other things, the following. Environmental
management must be integrated. Environmental justice must be pursued so
that adverse environmental impacts shall not be distributed in such a
manner as to unfairly discriminate against any person, particularly
vulnerable and disadvantaged persons. It must ensure equitable access to
environmental resources, benefits and services to meet basic human needs
and to ensure that human wellbeing can be pursued and special measures
taken to ensure access thereto by categories of persons disadvantaged by
unfair discrimination in the past.

As we enter the threshold of our third democratic Parliament and gear
ourselves for the centenary year of the ANC in 2012, I must say that as the
ANC we take pride that the legislative framework that our movement has
initiated in the last 14 years of democracy is building on our commitment
to a better South Africa.

Deputy Chairperson, that is why the centenary of our movement must find us
in a state where we are truly able to say with absolute certainty that
since democracy dawned on South Africa we have, indeed, reached the
threshold of prosperity for all in our advance to improve the lives of our
people.

The people expect that we continue to work to implement the decisions that
were made by the forbears of our movement when many of them took a solemn
oath to better the lives of the people and lead them into a democratic,
nonracial and nonsexist society.

We will, indeed, continue to increase the awareness of and concern for
environmental issues and to assist our people to develop the knowledge,
skills, values and commitments that we need for our country to achieve
sustainable development and environmental management.

It is for those reasons that we as the ANC, together with all provinces
that have sent their mandate, support this Bill as it will lead us to a
better environmental situation in the country. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Deputy Chair, I
would like to thank the chairperson of the select committee, Rev Moatshe,
the committee and all parties that saw the importance of this Bill coming
out as something that can be implemented, and more so that it can be
implemented with immediate effect. It will unblock all the problems and
people will see how serious we are as the leaders of the country.

I really thank you for the hard work. Now we have to go out there and see
to it that it is done, so that we do change the lives of the people. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape,
North West, Western Cape.

ABSTAIN: Limpopo.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


                   NATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS FRAMEWORK BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

 GENERAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING QUALITY ASSURANCE AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)


                       HIGHER EDUCATION AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr B J TOLO: Chaiperson, fourteen-and-a-half years into our democracy we
can stand tall as a nation for we have recorded monumental achievements.
Yes, we have reason to be proud for in such a short space of time we have
managed to propel our country forward; yet we also know that a lot still
needs to be done to further improve the quality of life of our people.

As I stand here today on the eve of the fourth national election we have no
doubt that our people will give the ANC a further mandate to improve their
conditions for they know no other party can do so. [Interjections.]

The education Bills before this House today complete a revolution in the
education landscape of our country. After our government realised that
there was no coherent strategic direction with regard to qualifications and
that some interested groups, for their own selfish interests, were duping
the SA Qualifications Authority, Saqa, into recognising qualifications and
programmes which have no value for our economy, the Ministers of Education
and Labour commissioned a review of the Saqa in 1995.

The National Qualifications Framework Bill before this House today is a
product of that seven-year-long review process. It was indeed found that
there were gaps in the implementation of the Saqa Act. They, therefore,
deemed it fit to come up with the new policy which is embodied in this
Bill.
The objectives of this policy are to integrate all elements of the
education and training system; to enable learners to progress to higher
levels from any starting point; to enable learners to transfer credits from
one part of the system to another; to allow for assessment and recognition
of prior learning and skills acquired through experience; and to enable
curricula to cut across traditional divisions of skills and knowledge.

The other shortcoming of the Saqa today is that it requires the Minister of
Education and the Minister of Labour to agree on various matters before
anything can be done. Practice has proved that that is a recipe for
disaster, because if there is no agreement there will be no movement. The
new Bill gives each Minister a separate sphere of responsibility while it
also requires them to co-operate and collaborate.

The Bill establishes three sectoral quality councils, that is Umalusi for
the general and further education and training sector; and the Council on
Higher Education for the higher education sector. Members will know that
Umalusi and the Council on Higher Education are already in existence.

The third quality council still to be established will be for the trades
and occupation sector. The first two quality councils are under the
stewardship of the Minister of Education while the third is the
responsibility of the Minister of Labour.
The two other Bills before this House, the General and Further Education
and Training Quality Assurance Amendment Bill and the Higher Education
Amendment Bill, are consequential amendments to allow Umalusi and the
Council on Higher Education to become quality councils for general and
further education and for higher education respectively.

In conclusion, we want to take this opportunity to wish all matriculants
well in their examinations. The class of 2008, among whom is my daughter,
are trailblazers as they are the first matriculants of the new National
Curriculum Statements. We commend these Bills to this House. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the National Qualifications Framework Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Free State, Mpumalanga, Northern
Cape, North West, Western Cape.

ABSTAIN: Gauteng, Limpopo.

National Qualifications Framework Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance
with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the General and Further Education and Training Quality
Assurance Amendment Bill be agreed to

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Free State, Mpumalanga, Northern
Cape, North West, Western Cape.

ABSTAIN: Gauteng, Limpopo.

General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance Amendment Bill
accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Higher Education Amendment Bill be agreed to.

Higher Education Amendment Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of
the Constitution.



              NATIONAL CONVENTIONAL ARMS CONTROL AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr A L MOSEKI: Chairperson, Comrade Deputy Minister and hon colleagues,
Comrade Mike says I must just table this speech, and I want to do that
because we don’t have any objection to the Bill tabled before this House.
But I just want to say that in recent years South Africa has emerged as an
international player in the arms supply industry, with the revenue
generated by the arms trade amounting to R50 billion in the year 2008.

Therefore, it is to be expected that South Africa must assume a responsible
role in this regard. Considering the unspeakable harm that can result from
certain weapons falling into the wrong hands, the establishment of a
predictable arms control system is therefore imperative. South Africa
should oblige in this regard in order to maintain credibility.

The current National Conventional Arms Control Act had been in operation
since 2003 and has been under review since 2006. Practical and legal
challenges have emerged since 2003, and new demands and developments in the
industry have necessitated the establishment of ground rules for the
continued effective functioning of the industry.

The possession of conventional arms needed to be regulated and it was
necessary to adopt a position in respect of dual-use items which could be
put to civilian or military use. An example of this is a computer which can
be employed to navigate a battleship while still being used in conventional
arms. An important objective of the new legislation is to criminalise the
possession of military arms except by a legal government security agency.

The delegation from the Department of Defence that presented the National
Conventional Arms Control Amendment Bill to the Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Affairs gave an extensive overview of the Bill,
setting out its key objectives.

The amendments are intended to ensure that the South African arms control
mechanism will become more effective, promote responsibility and
accountability in South Africa’s arms transfer and assist in prohibiting
mercenary activities.

The Department of Defence summarised the role of the National Conventional
Arms Control Committee, NCACC, as follows: The NCACC, which is a government
functionary, is instituted to regulate legitimate trade in arms. It
performs its functions in collaboration with the SAPS Central Firearms
Registry and the Department of Trade and Industry’s Non-Proliferation
Council.

The NCACC operates within the context of a strong defence industry base and
a sensitive arms industry. The department admits that the NCACC faces
administrative and legal challenges, but remains confident that it will be
able to deliver on all the objectives concerning its new functions as set
out in the Bill.
The transfer and regulation of arms must be seen in the context of the
commitment to the international agenda for disarmament and non-
proliferation, although the select committee was not entirely satisfied
about the explanation of why the end-user certificates are required for the
country.

In other words, what was raised by the committee is that whilst this piece
of legislation is important, there was the question as to why the end-user
should be required to provide the certificate. The department provided an
adequate response to that and it is on that basis that we say this is an
important piece of legislation on which the committee agrees.

There were other important questions that were raised by a number of
members seeking clarity. Questions were raised on the Wassenaar Arrangement
issue just to clarify what that thing means to us as a committee and what
the significance of it is. This was clarified as one of the important
requirements for international collaboration.

The committee, having listened to the department, agreed there is not much
that we can look for in terms of clarity. We agreed that this Bill as
presented before the committee provides the necessary tools to ensure that
there is proper control of the arms that have to be dealt with as was
explained to us, particularly aspects of arms that are invisible, such as
the ... [Interjections.]

But with regard to those aspects that were presented to us, the committee
actually dealt with them and agreed that all those identified aspects were
to be part of the dangerous arms category. The committee agreed that it
should be regulated as contained in this Bill. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

             NATIONAL RADIOACTIVE WASTE DISPOSAL INSTITUTE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, hon Minister of Minerals and Energy in
absentia, hon members, the management and storage of nuclear radioactive
waste continues to be a global challenge, even in the context of continuous
scientific innovation on waste storage. Hence, at Polokwane we all agreed,
and I quote:


  Our vision of the future includes a sustainable economy where all South
  Africans, including present and future generations, realise their right
  to an environment that is not harmful to their health or wellbeing.

That was a quote from a resolution of the 52nd conference of the ANC in
Polokwane in December 2007.

The use of nuclear technology by mankind for both medical and energy
purposes brought about a very complex variable in the form of the
management and storage of radioactive waste. Scientific development through
research and development on radioactive waste management and storage has
dominated discourse in the scientific community and raised the interest of
various groups throughout the 20th century up to the present. Hence, it is
imperative to ensure best practice and uphold sustainable development
principles.

As advocates of sustainable development, we believe that the management of
radioactive waste cannot be left to chance. It seeks a dedicated state
entity to manage the disposal of all waste. To concretise this view, the
National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill is intended to ensure
that a state-owned waste disposal entity is established. The establishment
of this entity allows the generators of waste to focus on their core
functions and issues of safety. For example, Eskom would no longer be
responsible for the disposal of its generated radioactive waste.

In terms of this Bill, the primary task of the National Radioactive Waste
Disposal Institute is to manage radioactive waste disposal on a national
basis on behalf of the Minister of Minerals and Energy. The institute will
also be responsible for, amongst other things, the production of disposal
solutions, the issuing of disposal certificates, managing disposal
facilities and designing new facilities when needed.
Furthermore, the Bill advocates an improvement in communication with the
general public on waste management issues. As a state-owned entity, the
financial affairs of the institute will be governed by the Public Finance
Management Act. Financing would also derive from the Radioactive Waste
Management Fund and loans.

The Bill also outlines responsibilities the generators of radioactive waste
would have to meet in order to qualify for a waste disposal certificate.
This piece of legislation puts in place strict measures for generators of
radioactive waste. They will have to have waste management plans and
strictly adhere to the certificate criteria. The entire Vaalputs disposal
facility, including all staff, will be incorporated into the institute.

At the 51st conference in Stellenbosch the ANC resolved that decisions on
nuclear energy must be based on a comprehensive and transparent
environmental impact assessment. As advocates of sustainable development
principles, our radioactive waste management policy is premised on
transparency. We hold the view that all radioactive waste management
activities shall be open and transparent and the public will also have
access to the information on radioactive waste management, as long as it
does not infringe on the security of radioactive waste material.

The creation of a state-owned institute is critical in ensuring compliance
in terms of the safety and security of radioactive material. This entity is
correctly positioned in the utilisation of natural resources, whilst
promoting socioeconomic development.

I table this important piece of legislation in the House and urge all
members to support it and remember that you are all advocates of
sustainable development principles. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.


                    MINE HEALTH AND SAFETY AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, ngokuchitshiyelwa koMthetho ophathelene nezempilo
nezokuphepha ezimayini kufanele sikhumbule ukuthi, ezindaweni eziningi
zemisebenzi ezimayini sibhekene nezingozi eziningi. Izingozi ezifana nokuwa
kwamatshe, ezempilo ezingezinhle, uthuli, imimoya emibi kanjalo
nokukhubazeka nje ngokuphefumula kanye nomoya ongahlanzekile.

Abasebenzi basezimayini kulezi zinsuku babhekene nalobu bunzima, ngakho-ke
bahlala njalo belimala, befa abanye kanjalo bekhubazeke. Ezikhathini
ezedlule lapha eNingizimu Afrika, izimayini eziningi bezibhekane nalezi
zingozi. Lezi zingozi ezingezinhle zenze kwaphoqa lo Mnyango nohulumeni
ukuthi kushicilelwe lo Mthetho, ukwazi ukubhekana nalesi simo futhi uzame
ukuvimba lesi simo.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa ophathelene nezimayini kwezempilo nezokuphepha wenza
isiqiniseko sokuthi kube khona izimpilo eziphatheke kahle emigodini futhi
nabasebenzi basemgodini baphephile. Ukulandela imithetho yonke yomhlaba,
leli lizwe lethu iNingizimu Afrika eliyingxenye yawo, kubalulekile ukuthi
lo Mthethosivivinywa oshicilelwe uhambisane nezinguquko nezinto ezenzeka
emhlabeni jikelele.

Lokhu kuchitshiyelwa kwalo Mthetho sivivinywa kuqiniseka okwashiwo
yinhlangano yethu yabantu, uKhongolose, ukuthi kufanele kube khona
ukuphepha ezindaweni zokusebenza ukuze kusizwe imiphefumulo eminingi. Uma
sibuka isigaba seshumi nanye kuMthethosisekelo waseNingizimu Afrika, sithi
wonke umuntu unelungelo lokuphila.

Ziningi izinguquko ezihlongozwayo kulo Mthethosivinywa. Isigaba seshumi
isona esenza ukuthi umqashi abenamabhuku okuqeqesha abasebenzi mayelana
nezempilo kanye futhi nezokuphepha. Isigaba seshumi nanye okunesigatshana
sesihlanu, sithi umqashi kufanele aphenye ngaso sonke isigameko esenzeka
emayini uma kunengozi.

Isigaba seshumi nantathu sisho ukuthi akube khona odokotela
abangochwepheshe ababizwa ngokuthi ama-occupational medical practitioner,
abazosebenza futhi bahlole izimayini kanye futhi neziguli uma kwenzeke lezi
zinkinga.

Isigaba samashumi amane nesikhombisa senza kusungulwe abazohlola ababizwa
ngama-inspectors ngabahloli, abazobuka  ukuthi zonke izinto zihamba kahle
yini. Siyikomidi kanye noKhongolose futhi siyinhlangano yabantu sicela
yonke le Ndlu siyikhuthaze ukuba ikwesekele ukuchitshiyelwa kwalo
Mthethosivinywa. Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
speech follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, in amending the Mine Health and Safety Act, we
must remember that we are faced with many accidents happening in the mining
sector. There are incidents such as falling rocks, poor health conditions,
dust and polluted air, as well as casualties caused by respiratory
infections and polluted air.
Mineworkers these days are faced with these difficult situations and as a
result they are always sustaining injuries or dying, and some of them
become disabled. And this was the case even in the previous dispensation
here in South Africa. These gruesome accidents have forced the department
concerned and government to introduce this Bill in order to face this
situation head-on and try to stop further casualties.

This Bill ensures good health and fair working conditions in mines, and
safety for mineworkers. In order to conform to international standards, it
is important that our country, South Africa, which is part of the world,
complies with the changes and things that happen internationally.

The amendment of the Act is further testimony to what was said by the
people’s movement, the ANC, namely that there must be safety in the
workplace so that many lives can be saved. If we look at section 11 of the
South African Constitution, it says that every person has the right to
life.

There are many amendments that are proposed in this Bill. Section 10
compels the employer to keep records of all the training of the employees
in health and safety issues. Section 11(5) states that the employer must
investigate every action that takes place in the mining workplace when
there is an accident.

Section 13 states that there must be occupational medical practitioners who
will work and monitor the mines as well as victims when these problems
occur.

Section 47 provides for the appointment of inspectors who will check if
everything is still well. On behalf of the committee and the people’s
movement, the ANC, we ask and encourage this House at large to support the
adoption of this Bill. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.
Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                          CONSUMER PROTECTION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr N S S MQUNGQUTHU: Chairperson and hon members, I think we have to
correct the matter of my surname first. I think there is a campaign amongst
officials here to write my surname according to their pronunciation. It is
very clear that my surname is Mqungquthu. On the speakers’ list it appears
as Mqunguthu. Can that please be corrected, Chairperson?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Your query is noted, and the matter
will be corrected.

Mr N S S MQUNGQUTHU: Thank you very much. The Select Committee on Economic
and Foreign Affairs considered on 4 November 2008 the Consumer Protection
Bill, Bill 19D of 2008, and the amendments incorporated by the National
Assembly on 26 September 2008. The amendments relate to the following.

Firstly, in terms of the labelling of genetically modified organisms, the
Bill was amended to include the labelling of products containing
genetically modified ingredients in order to inform consumers and enable
them to choose. The Bill also seeks to hold suppliers, manufacturers and
retailers strictly liable for damage caused by their genetically modified
products.

Secondly, regarding implied warranties, sections 54 and 56 of the Bill were
amended to enable consumers to choose whether they want the goods to be
repaired or get a refund, in line with the common understanding that a
refund to a consumer should not be at the discretion of the supplier. This
relates to goods that are not fit for the purpose for which they were
bought or are of poor quality.

Thirdly, there is the matter of the appointment of deputy commissioners.
The Bill is amended to enable the Minister to appoint deputy commissioners
in order to capacitate the National Consumer Commission and provide for a
structured decision-making authority to assist the commissioner.

The exclusion of the appointment of deputy commissioners was an oversight.
As we are quite aware that this country has a shortage of commissioners, we
therefore requested that the Minister at least appoints deputy
commissioners. This would ensure that the process of addressing issues is
fast-tracked, more especially on the part of consumers.

Fourthly, in terms of alignment with the National Credit Act of 2005, the
Bill makes provisions for consequential amendment of the National Credit
Act provisions empowering the National Consumer Tribunal to impose a fine.
The extension of the powers of the tribunal to impose financial penalties
is in line with the Consumer Protection Act.

Fifthly, with regard to the application of the Act, the Bill is amended to
ensure that it does not regulate the trade union service and its members.
Furthermore, the threshold for regulating business-to-business transactions
is amended to ensure that the Bill only protects small and medium-sized
businesses from unfair business practices. Therefore, the threshold is no
longer based on the size of the transaction, but on the value of the
turnover and the value of the assets.

In conclusion, I request this House to vote in favour of this Bill. I thank
you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape,
North West, Western Cape.

ABSTAIN: KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Can I just ascertain one point? In
terms of our records, Limpopo and KwaZulu-Natal have abstained. Is that
correct or is it the result of a technical problem? [Interjections.] It is
correct. Thank you very much.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chairperson, it could be that my screen was misleading
me; it showed two abstentions, one province that didn’t vote and six that
voted in favour of the Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mine is reliable.

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: This technology is not helping us, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Only one province has voted
manually, and that is Gauteng.

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Ok, now that answers my question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): It’s consistent; the hon member
doesn’t have a card. Members will understand why not.

               PROVISION OF LAND AND ASSISTANCE AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson and hon members, the Land Reform: Provision
of Land and Assistance Act, Act 126 of 1993, was promulgated before the
commencement of the interim Constitution, primarily to settle people on
agricultural, peri-urban and urban land.

As a result of subsequent policy development, the Act no longer contains
sufficient scope for effective and sustainable land redistribution in South
Africa. The implementation of the 2006 Proactive Land Acquisition Strategy
of the Department of Land Affairs revealed several interpretation problems,
inconsistencies and omissions in the Land Reform Provision of Land and
Assistance Act of 1993.

Currently sections 10 and 11 of the Act are not sufficient to give
effective policy development. Furthermore, no provision has been made for
the Minister to acquire all types of movable and immovable property or
economic enterprises essential for sustainable land reform. The
acquisition, maintenance, planning, development, improvement and disposal
of property are also not adequately provided for in the Act.

Therefore, the objectives of this Bill are to give effect to the land and
related reform obligations of the state in terms of section 25 of the
Constitution; to promote, facilitate or support the maintenance, planning,
sustainable use, development and improvement of property as contemplated in
this Act; and to contribute to poverty alleviation and promote economic
growth.

In conclusion, the proposed amendments would provide for the acquisition
and the development of sustainable, fully equipped agricultural enterprises
by government. The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs
supports the Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT BY SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS
  - TREATY OF FRIENDSHIP AND PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN RSA AND RUSSIAN FEDERATION

Mr J M SIBIYA: Chairperson, Deputy Chair, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, the last clause of the Freedom Charter states, “There shall be
peace and friendship”.

South Africa, as a fully independent state, respects the rights and
sovereignty of all nations, big or small. The country strives to maintain
world peace and the settlement of international disputes by negotiation and
diplomacy, not war. All of the above form the core of our foreign policy.

The Treaty of Friendship and Partnership between RSA and the Russian
Federation is a living testimony and bedrock of our people’s desire to
strengthen friendship, and promote mutual understanding, all-round co-
operation and equitable relations between the two countries. It is another
milestone in the two countries’ commitment to the declaration of principles
of friendly relations and partnership, which they signed in April 1999.

Both countries believe in relationships or partnership based on the
commonality of their vital national interests, ideals of freedom,
democracy, equality and the universally recognised principles and norms of
international law. Together they are going to work towards a more just and
democratic multipolar world order and the benefits of globalisation and
participation in world affairs.

Through the treaty the two countries are committed to the centrality of the
United Nations in international affairs. For South Africa, the treaty is
going to open up new avenues for ensuring and contributing to the training
of personnel for peacekeeping operations and the exchanging of experience
in the sphere of preventive and peacekeeping diplomacy. It also increases
regional and international efforts to solve the problem of the uncontrolled
spread and illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, especially in
Africa.

Above all, the treaty commits the two counties to multilateral disarmament
without which everything else on earth would not be easily solved. It also
strengthens nonproliferation of instruments of weapons of mass destruction
as well as the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968; the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction of 1993; and the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction of
1972.

These weapons are extremely dangerous and deadly. Above all, some of these
weapons are capable of destroying earth ten times over. I think this is
very important to all of us. That is why all sober-minded individuals in
the world are urging each one of us to do everything in our power to make
sure that a third World War does not break out. If that war breaks out, we
should make no mistake, it will definitely be a thermonuclear war and there
would be no place to hide, not for anyone. Therefore, we cannot afford to
relax unless these weapons are destroyed.

The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs supports the report
and invites this august House to do the same. I thank you.
Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal,
Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
                          AFFAIRS - LEGAL AID GUIDE

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, colleagues, comrades and friends and the
hon Chief Whip, I am tabling before this House something very important and
I will need the members’ undivided attention.

We are tabling a Legal Aid Guide that will assist us as members and public
representatives to go and assist our people and find out who qualifies to
get legal aid and who doesn’t. I suppose all members have it and will take
it to their respective constituencies. It is important for members to take
it with them because it is the 11th edition of this guide. The last time it
was amended was before 1994.

This guide classifies people who qualify. Our concern as a committee was
that the state uses money to defend people who have committed offences like
abduction, arson, incest, murder, bestiality and even rape. As a committee
we said that while everybody needs to be protected and to be given some
legal aid, we think it is time that Parliament reviews this guide.

Concerning exclusions - that is, people who are excluded from getting legal
aid - people who are fighting to claim their land because of the
restitution of land rights are excluded. They can’t get help. Hon Sibiya,
hon Themba and hon Gamede, could you please take note of this?

Asylumseekers who do not even pay tax in our country qualify to get legal
aid. To us that is unfair to our own people. Nonetheless, there are things
that are good that had to be improved or implemented.

Many of you, when doing your constituency work, hon Kgarebe, come across
double bookings. You find that one legal representative is expected to
represent five people who are at times appearing in different courts.

It is up to us, as legal representatives, to question this guide. Until and
unless this guide is amended, the status quo will continue. We can’t allow
that. Nonetheless, there are some good things that we accommodated.

On that note, let us support this guide for now, because we as the
committee have instructed the department to come before Parliament with the
amended version of this guide or bring legislation to deal with that within
12 months.

We don’t understand why it’s important that our student attorneys only
represent people in criminal cases but not civil matters. Why? Some of us
feel this is unfair to our people because in most cases those who go for
civil cases are those loyal citizens of our country, those loyal voters who
are going to vote for the ANC next year. There is no way they can be
disadvantaged.

It is up to us as public representatives to take this guide home and assist
our people because they need it. If they don’t have it, they won’t know
their rights. They won’t know who qualifies for what, hon Priscilla Themba.
On that note, I table this report before the House. Let us adopt it. Thank
you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal,
Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   AFFAIRS - SUSPENSION/REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE S P ZWELIBANZI,
                     ADDITIONAL MAGISTRATE AT NGQAMAKHWE

Mr D J P VAN DER MERWE: Chair, hon members, the Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Affairs met on 17 June 2008 to consider the
report and recommendations of the Magistrates’ Commission regarding the
suspension of Magistrate S P Zwelibanzi, pending approval by Parliament.
The report recommends that Magistrate Zwelibanzi be removed from office.

Mr Zwelibanzi, 50 years of age, served as a magistrate for 11 years. He was
convicted of misconduct on two previous occasions for infringements that
included unauthorised absence from office, failure to enter results in the
register of the criminal trial and failure to answer reviewing judges’
questions. He was cautioned on these matters. He was also convicted of
driving while intoxicated, and he was suspended in this regard. Mr
Zwelibanzi pleaded guilty to all of the above offences.

A disciplinary hearing was held, but Mr Zwelibanzi did not attend the
scheduled hearing. The presiding officer was satisfied that all procedural
requirements had been adhered to, and the hearing thus proceeded in his
absence. [Interjections.]
Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chairperson, on a point of order: The House needs
clarification as to whether this is a suspension or a removal because it
can’t be both.

Mr D J P VAN DER MERWE: We will come to that, sir.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): The hon member says he will give
direction on this as he concludes.

Mr D J P VAN DER MERWE: Maybe I will suspend you, sir. Thanks. [Laughter.]

However, Mr Zwelibanzi later claimed that he was unable to attend the
hearing as he had been in a psychiatric institution. The leader of evidence
at the hearing informed the presiding officer that Mr Zwelibanzi was in
hospital, but no further evidence was provided in this regard.

During deliberations, the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs considered whether Mr Zwelibanzi had been given enough opportunity
to make representation prior to his dismissal, and whether the Magistrates’
Commission had given due consideration to his alcohol dependency and the
possibility of rehabilitation.

As there was a shortage of black magistrates, it was felt that the state
should assist Mr Zwelibanzi in any way possible, and that dismissal should
be the last resort. The committee also considered the fact that Mr
Zwelibanzi had been in a psychiatric institution at the time of the
hearing, and it was of the opinion that further investigation was
necessary. The committee then ruled that a letter be served on Mr
Zwelibanzi to afford him an opportunity to make representations as to why
he should not be dismissed.

The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development reported back to
the committee on 6 October 2008 regarding the outcome of the investigation.
A letter had been served on Mr Zwelibanzi through his ex-wife. However, Mr
Zwelibanzi did not respond to the letter and his whereabouts were still
unknown. The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development confirmed
that Mr Zwelibanzi was still receiving his full salary.

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs is satisfied
that all attempts have been made to trace Mr Zwelibanzi and that his
failure to make representations after the letter had been served on him
left us no option but to conclude that it would be in the interests of
justice to remove Mr Zwelibanzi from office. The committee thus endorses
the decision of the Magistrates’ Commission that Mr Zwelibanzi be removed
from office. Thank you, sir. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal,
Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:45.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    1) Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 11 November 2008:


          a) Consumer Protection Bill [B 19D – 2008] (National Council of
             Provinces – sec 76(2)).


          b) National Conventional Arms Control Amendment Bill [B 45B –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          c) Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the National Road
    Traffic Amendment Bill [B 39B - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76),
    dated 4 November 2008:

    The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the National
    Road Traffic Amendment Bill [B 39B - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76)
    referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

 2. Report of the Select Committee  on  Education  and  Recreation  on  the
    Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill [B  68  -
    2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 4 November 2008:

    The Select Committee on Education and Recreation having considered  the
    subject of the Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal
    Bill [B 68 - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75),  referred  to  it  and
    classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports
    that it has agreed to the Bill.

 3. Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the Dutch
    Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69 - 2008] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 4 November 2008:

    The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having considered the
    Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69 –  2008]  (National
    Assembly – sec 75) referred to it, reports that it has  agreed  to  the
    Bill.

 4. Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on The
    Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill [B
    71B - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 4 November 2008:

    The Select Committee on Education and Recreation having considered the
    subject of The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act
    Repeal Bill [B 71B - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to
    it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


