---
title: 'National Assembly - 05 March 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-03-05
---

Wednesday, 5 march 2008
                                    ____

                    Proceedings of the national assembly
                                    ____

The House met at 14:10.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr K J MINNIE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

   That the House debates the impact the government’s proposal for a single
   public service will have on the constitutional imperative of three
   independent spheres of government.

I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
behalf of the ACDP:
      That the House debates the controversial issues surrounding the Choice
      on Termination of Pregnancy Act, the new scientific evidence that has
      come to light and the strong public opinion opposing abortion on
      demand.


   Thank you.

                     Death of 31 people in KwaZulu-Natal

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes with profound sadness the death of at least 31 people in a
        number of motor accidents in KwaZulu-Natal on Monday, 3 March 2008;

   (2)      recognises that these deaths have led to KwaZulu-Natal Premier
        S’bu Ndebele declaring Thursday, 6 March 2008, a day of mourning
        for the victims of the accidents;


   (3)      calls on all South Africans to be more responsible on our roads
        to prevent the death of more innocent people; and


   (4)      conveys its condolences to the loved ones of all those who died.

Agreed to.

             Congratulations to minister marthinus van schalkwyk

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF the MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that on Tuesday, 26 February 2008, hon Minister Marthinus
        van Schalkwyk won a gold award in the highly acclaimed Tourism
        Minister of the Year category at the inaugural Ai Tourism Investor
        Awards held in Johannesburg;


     2) recalls that the awards were established to showcase Africa’s
        opportunities and achievements to the rest of the world,
        collectively raise awareness about Africa as a tourist destination
        and reward those groups developing the African tourism industry as
        a vehicle to drive sustainable economic growth;


     3) acknowledges that the businesses that drive tourism investment are
        making a significant contribution to the creation of jobs and
        sustainable development in Africa; and

     4) congratulates the Minister on winning the award and urges him to
        continue the good work.

Agreed to.

                          INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that 8 March is International Women’s Day, an occasion
        celebrated by women around the world, commemorated at the United
        Nations and designated in many countries as a national holiday;


   (2)      recalls that when women, often divided by national boundaries
        and by ethnic, linguistic, cultural, economic and political
        differences, come together to celebrate this day, they can look
        back to a tradition that represents more than nine decades of
        struggle for equality, peace and development;

   (3)      recognises that International Women’s Day is the story of
        ordinary women as makers of history and is rooted in the centuries-
        old struggle for women to participate in society on an equal
        footing with men;

   (4)      further recognises that it is women who sustain life, who care
        for children and elders and who do so against all odds and with
        little resources and support and infrastructure and that millions
        of women in our country and the world live in conditions of
        poverty;


   (5)      believes that it is incumbent upon each and every one of us to
        be agents of change, to win the battle against sexism and racism
        and to shape the new world order; and


   (6)      calls on all parliaments and governments to work to ensure that
        the agenda for women’s emancipation is given priority attention so
        that we can move with due speed towards a nonsexist and just world.

Agreed to.

                         DEATH OF Nkosinathi Nyembe
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M L MATSEMELA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the past weekend saw a rather
depressing report about a young man, Nkosinathi Nyembe, who allegedly
committed suicide because an NGO, the Africa Centre for Health and
Population Studies, in Somkhele outside Mtubatuba, persuaded and coerced
him to do an HIV test without properly counselling him.

Human immunodeficiency virus and Aids are medical conditions of lifestyle
and thus no effort must be spared by government, business, labour, the NGO
sector and communities in the fight to reduce the number of infections as
well as to slow down the progression to full-blown Aids.

However, this must not be pursued overzealously, recklessly and callously
by those who merely want to report statistics to their overseas funders on
the prevalence and incidence of HIV and Aids. The behaviour of the field
workers who are violating the freedom and security of people in Somkhele
must be investigated and dealt with.

We encourage all South Africans to support the war against HIV and Aids by
supporting efforts to promote voluntary testing, counselling and testing
guided by informed consent. No amount of strong-arm tactics will succeed in
tackling this scourge. All those who treat our people as guinea pigs
without regard for their basic human rights must be exposed and made to
account for their inhumane deeds. Thank you. [Applause.]

                   MORATORIUM ON NEW CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Madam Speaker, Eskom’s recently announced decision to
impose a six-month moratorium on all new construction projects, combined
with the detrimental effects of power rationing on the mining sector, will
likely result in economic growth being reduced to below 3%. This, in turn,
will have disastrous implications for desperately needed job creation. This
is a direct contradiction of Cabinet’s decision, dated 25 January 2008,
that, and I quote, “There is no question of stopping contracted projects or
freezing any new projects.”

This dire economic outlook also contradicts Minister Alec Erwin’s assurance
earlier this year that the power crisis will not have any detrimental
effect on the economy. It is obvious to all but Minister Erwin that
government’s bungling on the Eskom issue is costing the country billions of
rands and could potentially lead to thousands of job losses.

It is hard to imagine a more fundamental mismanagement of any particular
industry by any government in the world. Instead of urgently and honestly
responding to this crisis to minimise its effects on the economy, Mr Erwin
has done just the opposite – he has created a large amount of unnecessary
anger and uncertainty, and has impeded the search for solutions as a
result.

In addition, he has used deliberate distortions of the truth in an attempt
to deflect blame for South Africa’s electricity crisis from where it
belongs – firmly on his shoulders. The only way to restore confidence in
government on this issue is for Minister Erwin to do the right thing and
resign.

                   INADEQUACY OF POLICE OFFICERS’ TRAINING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP is shocked to hear that only
about 10% of commissioners at police stations are adequately trained to
head them. The IFP believes that urgent plans should be put in place to
ensure that police stations are led by knowledgeable and experienced police
officers.

In a country where crime is rampant and out of control, this is non-
negotiable. Surely, much more effort should be invested in getting
commissioners trained and up to speed.

Alternatively, the IFP believes that internal restructuring of the police
is needed immediately so that the most qualified and experienced police
officers are deployed at police stations as station commanders.

All these problems have been highlighted before, yet there seems to be
little action from government to rectify them. We hope that government will
finally put some effort into solving the many crises that are besetting the
SA Police Service. I thank you.

                     CORRUPT PRACTICES UNCOVERED IN KZN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J NENE (ANC): Madam Speaker, a recent surprise visit by the KwaZulu-
Natal MEC for Social Development to the regional offices at Empangeni
corrupt uncovered practices. Numerous birth certificates and identity
documents, suspected to have been used to illegally access money in the
form of grants, were discovered.

The ANC has, throughout its 96 years of existence, always embodied and
aspired to the highest moral and progressive values. Any examples of
unethical conduct by public officials destroy the trust of citizens in
public institutions and governance processes.

The ANC believes that corruption is systemic and an institutional
phenomenon that impacts on all sectors of society, undermines the
democratic processes and corporate governance, and erodes social cohesion
and values.

We commend the efforts by the KZN provincial government which are aimed at
rooting out the bad element that is giving our Public Service a bad name. I
thank you.

                        MISSING AND ABDUCTED CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Speaker, the ACDP marks National Missing
Children’s Day today, with an expression of sorrow and hope, to those who
have experienced the horror of loved ones having gone missing.

To have a child go missing, run away or be abducted must be the most
harrowing experience. Not knowing what has happened to them and wondering
if they are alive or dead is a recurring nightmare that for many never
ends. The ACDP acknowledges today as Pink Day, declared in remembrance of
two precious girls, Anastasia and Sheldean, who went missing coincidentally
wearing pink shirts.

There is also an International Missing Children’s Day on 25 May, and both
dates serve to remind communities of the vital need to be vigilant. A
growing number of children and teens are going missing, being abducted or
being enticed with bogus job offers.

During deliberations on the Children’s Act, the ACDP argued fiercely to
ensure that provinces are now obliged to provide and fund prevention and
early intervention services for children at risk. Lack of funding has,
until now, severely restricted child protection organisations to dealing
with children in crisis when it is often too late, rather than their being
able to intervene effectively at an earlier stage. Anastasia’s
circumstances are a case in point, as her parents’ drug habit had placed
her in grave danger.

Many mothers are forced to work and have no option but to leave their
children in the care of family or community members. The ACDP calls on
members of provincial executive councils and of local councils to fast-
track protection services like crèches and early childhood development
centres for the protection and education of our very youngest children.

The ACDP also urges a mindset in corporate environments to create early
childhood development and aftercare facilities in business establishments
that facilitate the all-day safety of young children of working parents. I
thank you.

                      EXTENSION OF CHILD SUPPORT GRANTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Speaker, the Independent Democrats would like to
extend our support to Florence Mahlangu, the domestic worker from Mabopane,
who has brought an application asking the Pretoria High Court to order
government to extend the child support grant to poor children up to the age
of 18.

The reason why our children have additional rights in section 28 of our
Constitution is because they are the most vulnerable. Therefore when
parents cannot afford to support them, the state must fulfil its
constitutional mandate and step in. The ID has been calling for almost two
years for the extension of the child support grant to children up to the
age of 18.

Government’s commitment to extend the child grant from 14 to 15 years from
the beginning of next year is simply not enough. The hunger of our children
does not stop at the end of 14 or 15 years, and all our children deserve
prioritisation in terms of the Constitution. The Constitution defines a
child as anyone under the age of 18.

The ID would also like to commend Minister Zola Skweyiya for his persistent
efforts to increase the grant to the age of 18. I thank you.

                          QUALITY EDUCATION FOR ALL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P R MASHANGOANE (ANC): Madam Speaker, education is fundamental to the
achievement of the society envisaged in the Freedom Charter. Teachers are a
critical element in our important task of ensuring quality education for
all.

When the great majority of our people faced the oppressive impact of Bantu
education, it was teachers who stood up and ensured that we confounded the
architect of apartheid by producing doctors, lawyers, engineers and other
professions. The Gauteng provincial government led by the ANC has, among
other critical interventions, set aside funds to improve educators’
salaries, increase clerical staff in schools and districts, as well as
engage in skills development.

This allocation is part of the ongoing national quest to provide quality
education and ensure that a significant number of learners have access to
education on the nationally agreed funding priorities for the department
over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period. The ANC policy of free
education for the first 10 years remains critical to the attainment of the
goal of opening the doors of learning and culture to all. Thank you.

                  NEED FOR RESOLUTION OF ZIMBABWEAN CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B C NGIBA (Nadeco): Madam Speaker, as the people of Zimbabwe head to the
polling station on 29 March 2008, and hundreds of Zimbabweans continue to
stream across the borders of this country, fleeing political instability,
seeking food, shelter, employment and security, this government needs to
ask itself how long it will continue to maintain “quiet diplomacy”.

We are well aware of the President’s mediation efforts earlier this year.
Yet we, as Nadeco, strongly feel that greater initiatives needed to be
created and successfully implemented to solve this Zimbabwean crisis.

This country is a beacon of hope for the rest of the African continent.
Africa and the rest of the international community look to South Africa to
be the torchbearer of the concept of the African Renaissance, as coined by
our President. Thus we need to ensure that we champion the spirit of the
African Renaissance that we constantly preach. I thank you.

                INABILITY OF POLICE TO COPE IN PARKTOWN NORTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Speaker, I rise to mourn Julian Lap, well-known
architect and resident of my constituency, who was brutally murdered in an
armed robbery at his home in Parktown North on Sunday night.

The life of his wife, prominent businesswoman, Marilyn Visser, who was
critically wounded in the incident, hangs by a thread. Their 16-year-old
son lies critically injured in hospital. Mr Lap was an active member of the
Ward 90 committee of Councillor Ian Ollis, in my constituency – always
involved, always willing to assist.

He is the tenth prominent murder victim in this hardest-hit-by-crime-area
of the ward since Councillor Ollis was elected two years ago. Others
include Sandy Staats of Craighall Park who was tied up and boiled in hot
water; Mike Thompson, father of two, of Craighall, who was stabbed, shot
and thrown into his swimming pool in front of his young son; the very next
day, Terry Smith, also of Craighall, was hijacked and shot dead; Theresa
Goldworthy of Craighall Park, was shot and killed while sitting in her car;
Barbara Harrison of Beaufort Avenue was brutally attacked in her home and
died as a result; and Ian Giles of Giles Restaurant in Craighall Park was
brutally murdered. There are more I could and should list if I had time.

Last November Councillor Ollis and I visited Provincial Commissioner
Perumal Naidoo about the spate of murders and we were promised more
patrols, more roadblocks, more staff at Parkview police station, but little
appears to have been done.

While MEC for Safety and Security in Gauteng, Firoz Cachalia, is claiming
some success in the fight against crime, the bottom line is that the police
in Johannesburg are not coping with the rapidly rising rate of brutal
murders and robberies at private homes. They don’t have the leadership, the
capacity, or the resources to cope, and this government must take the
blame. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                       RECENT SPATE OF ROAD ACCIDENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr O M MOGALE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC is concerned about the spate of
road accidents that have occurred just this week in KwaZulu-Natal and other
parts of the country, resulting in many lives being lost.

The next few weeks will mark the beginning of the Easter holiday period
when our roads will again be congested. The period brings joy and happiness
as families and friends reunite, but it also brings with it the possibility
of pain and difficulties that may result from road accidents.

The majority of accidents are caused by drivers’ negligence and disregard
of traffic regulations resulting in road fatalities. Abuse of alcohol also
contributes significantly to accidents. The ANC calls on all road users to
observe traffic regulations, including speed limits, not to drink and
drive, and to take regular rests along the way. Pedestrians should also
ensure that they wear visible clothing, particularly in the evening.

The ANC conveys its heartfelt condolences to the families of those who have
lost their lives in the recent accidents and wishes the injured a speedy
recovery. Thank you. [Applause.]

                             PROBLEMS IN SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Speaker, I am deeply concerned about the
crisis affecting learners and teachers in some of our schools - overcrowded
classes, understaffing, teacher salaries, as well as shortages of books and
power. For instance, two schools at Lotus Gardens are reported to have
serious problems relating to a shortage of textbooks and electricity. For
some schools to have blocked toilets and unpaid electricity bills is
frustrating and demoralising - for both teachers and pupils.

Teachers at Lotus Gardens have correctly pointed out that the current
crisis is a result of bad planning by the Gauteng Department of Education.
Most of the problems were highlighted to the department the previous year,
but it is now almost two months into the school-term and these problems
have not yet been addressed. Some schools are still waiting for the
department to deliver mobile classrooms in order to reduce overcrowding. We
urge the Department of Education to ensure that these problems are
addressed as soon as possible so that they do not haunt the affected
schools throughout the year.

In terms of our Constitution, all our learners have the right to equal and
quality education. I thank you.

                       ATTACK ON WOMAN BY TAXI DRIVERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S S VUNDISA (ANC): Madam Speaker, recently, when certain people - taxi
drivers - allegedly assaulted and tore the clothes of a young woman,
accusing her of having been inappropriately dressed, the whole country
roundly deplored the behaviour of the attackers.

We all asserted that the Constitution has entrenched the rights of women,
including their right to equality, human dignity, freedom and security of
person. The point has thus been made that women’s rights are in their
entirety human rights. The ANC supports efforts to advance these rights and
therefore commends all those who descended on Joubert Park yesterday to
take part in a demonstration in response to the incident that took place at
the Noord Street taxi rank two weeks ago.

Our freedom will only have meaning if it addresses the oppression suffered
by women in the past. We need, as South Africans, to sustain our united
efforts aimed at eradicating oppressive power relations in our society and
vigorously to pursue gender awareness campaigns and practices. I thank you.
[Applause.]

            INTERNATIONAL TRADE ADMINISTRATION COMMISSION NOTICE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE (DA): Madam Speaker, the International Trade
Administration Commission has given notice that it is considering
recommending to the Minister of Trade and Industry that certain antidumping
duties be terminated in view of the Supreme Court of Appeal’s decision in
the case of Progress Office Machines versus Itac and others.

Representations have been made from both sides of the House that such a
possible step could impact negatively on the activities of many South
African companies and, more importantly, on jobs. I would like to urge the
Minister of Trade and Industry to heed the calls for caution.

Moreover, I would like to express my confidence in the Minister that no
precipitous steps will be taken without the widest consultation with all
affected parties to ensure that any decision will not have a negative
impact on or unintended consequences for our industries, economy and jobs.
Thank you.

          AGREEMENTS BETWEEN EUROPEAN COMMISSION AND SADC COUNTRIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr M SEFULARO (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC notes with concern the current
trends and threats to the ongoing talks on economic partnership agreements
between the European Commission and SADC countries that, among others,
belong to the Southern African Customs Union, Sacu.

We are concerned that the EC negotiators tend to put inappropriate
pressures on SADC and Sacu countries, seeking to exploit the different
economic and other endowments of the member countries. They employ a
combination of threats of laws of EU markets and pressures to open up
services, remove taxes, as well as allowing other measures that will
grossly disadvantage SADC and other African countries.

We note with concern that the pressures threaten the unity and coherence of
SADC and Sacu, while retard progress towards regional and continental
integration. We therefore call upon the EC to desist from all forms of
threats and inappropriate pressures on SADC, Sacu and other African
nations.

We call on all African regional customs and economic communities to
maintain their unity in rejecting all attempts at circumventing the
objectives of the least developed countries in the WTO, including attempts
at reversing gains made through the Doha Rounds of WTO negotiations.

We urge the Parliament of South Africa not to ratify any EPA agreements
that will reverse the fight against inequality, unemployment and poverty in
South Africa and on the African continent. I thank you. [Applause.]

                   FAILURE OF TEACHERS TO PASS MATHEMATICS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): Madam Speaker, a group of Grade 4 mathematics
teachers who were recently given a Grade 4 maths test obtained an average
score of only 25%. In other words, the teachers who teach our children
maths only know, on average, a quarter of the syllabus. Under these
circumstances it is not surprising that only 18% of learners who wrote
matric last year obtained matric exemption.

If the teachers themselves are failing the subjects they are teaching, with
dismal results, how can our children possibly do well? There is no excuse
for teachers who do not know their subjects.

The DA believes that, rather than having to go through the numerous
bureaucratic and immensely time-consuming procedures that the department
currently uses to try and evaluate teacher performance, every teacher must
simply be required to write, at regular intervals, the same exams that
their learners write. Those teachers who do not perform adequately in these
exams must face the consequences.

Our children are doing as badly in school now as they did 14 years ago
under an apartheid system. This situation has arisen because for too long
we have tolerated one excuse after another for teachers who can’t or won’t
get to grips with the subjects they teach. We urgently need to take steps
to ensure that our teachers meet the basic requirements of their jobs.
Thank you. [Applause.]

         SADC AND EUROPEAN COMMISSION ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, I rise to respond to the
statement made on the SADC economic partnership agreement and the European
Commission negotiations.

Any interregional negotiation is bound to be difficult because of the
number of countries and the need to take care of the interests of all the
countries in each of the regions. It is also difficult between a developed
part of the world and a developing part of the world, because you also have
to look at another type of balance, which is the respective commitments
that are undertaken by the countries from these different regions in terms
of development.

There are other balances that you also need to look at. For us it was
important to look at the developmental outcome, whether this negotiation
produces an outcome that helps us to achieve development, and also to look
at whether in that negotiation we, as developing countries, are left with
sufficient policy space to be able to continue to advance our goals towards
deeper and deeper levels of development. Quite importantly, we also need to
look at whether this negotiation and the outcome assist us in terms of
achieving our objectives on regional integration.

These last three issues that I have mentioned are actually at the heart of
South Africa’s concerns and have accounted for South Africa holding back
from initialling or signing the interim economic partnership agreement
between the SADC region and the European Union.

We recognise that there were time pressures that made it difficult for us
to properly resolve a lot of the issues. We also understand that there were
lots of other pressures on countries, such as the threat of a loss of
markets on the part of some countries, if we had not concluded this work by
the end of this year.

And so, out of all of that, we felt that the outcome of the negotiation did
not really give us, on these three areas – regional integration, policy
space and development outcome – appropriate outcomes. So, for the past few
weeks, South Africa has spent a lot of time talking to our colleagues in
the region, because the unity of the region is something that is quite
important to us to maintain.

We have also participated in the meeting that took place in Gaborone
yesterday in which it was agreed that these three key areas of concern for
South Africa and Namibia will be addressed as the process moves ahead
towards a full EPA by the end of the year. So we shall be engaging in
dealing with these concerns without taking away any benefits from any of
the countries that has initialled the interim economic partnership
agreement.

                    ADDITIONAL REMUNERATION FOR TEACHERS
                             PROBLEMS IN SCHOOLS
                   IMPORTANCE OF HAVING QUALIFIED TEACHERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much Deputy Speaker, I
have responses to the three education statements and a response to the hon
Patricia de Lille in relation to the child grant.

With regard to education, we certainly affirm and applaud and recognise the
enormous contributions made by our educators in the past under very
difficult and challenging conditions. They were leaders in their
communities. They represented the political consciousness of our people.
They did their work with a great deal of passion and today we continue to
see thousands of educators committing themselves under very difficult and
challenging circumstances and contributing to the provision of quality
education.
Therefore indeed we celebrate, with the hon member, the increase in
allocation for additional remuneration. I believe that teachers have to be
recognised for the enormous contribution they make. We draw the House’s
attention particularly to the occupation-specific dispensation as well as
the rewards and incentives that are provided for those educators who teach
in rural areas as well as in difficult circumstances.

However, teachers must also be reminded - and there are teachers who are
guilty of dereliction of duty - that it is important and it is non-
negotiable that they should be in school on time, that they should teach
with the necessary passion and commitment, that contact time is critical,
and that they ought to be competent and confident in what they do.
Therefore we believe that there is a reciprocal responsibility on the part
of educators to carry on the proud tradition of educators of yesteryear to
ensure that we provide quality education to our learners.

With regard to the concerns raised about Gauteng - I think it was Lotus or
Loftus Gardens - I do believe this is an enormous problem that we have to
face. Given our past, the enormous disparities in terms of our schools are
quite extraordinary. Less than 25% of our schools have libraries, and less
than 40% of our schools have laboratories. We have challenges with regard
to infrastructure, particularly in provinces such as Limpopo, the Eastern
Cape and KwaZulu-Natal. These are matters that must and will continue to
receive our urgent attention.

We have done extremely well in terms of reducing the number of unsafe
schools. We have built thousands of additional classrooms and indeed the
concern raised by the hon member is one that I take very seriously. I will
engage with the department of education in Gauteng to ascertain precisely
what the status is and why they have not delivered when they ought to.
Overcrowded classrooms are indeed unacceptable and they do impact on the
quality of learning and education in whatever school.

With regard to the other concern raised, I am not aware of the report, but
it cannot be acceptable that an educator performs as badly as or even worse
than a learner. That cannot be acceptable. The standards that we set for
our educators are that they must be competent, proficient in their learning
areas, and have the ability to be good facilitators in promoting quality
education.

However, we must also look at and reflect on where we were 14 years ago.
Fourteen years ago, less than 30% of our educators - and there are more
than 350 000 educators - were qualified or competent to teach. Today we can
say that it’s more than 85%.

We believe that central to the success of a school is the commitment,
competence and efficiency of the educator component. Therefore, for an
educator to qualify to teach in any of our schools, he or she must have a
degree. In other words, we cannot accept mediocrity. We also emphasise in
terms of these subject areas that content is critical and necessary. Thank
you very much, Deputy Speaker. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I just want to read this out because it is so
embarrassing to stop a member of the executive whilst they are giving
valuable information and ask them to take their seats. A maximum of six
Ministerial responses are allowed. A response should not exceed two
minutes, to allow other members of the executive to also participate.

                         CORRUPTION IN KWAZULU-NATAL
                             ZIMBABWE ELECTIONS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Deputy Speaker, an hon member made a
comment on the issue of rooting out corrupt elements in KwaZulu-Natal. I
think we should commend the joint operations by our state organs which are
giving us the desired results of having some of these elements rooted out
of the Public Service. Hence, we see a number of people being arrested in
areas such as KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape for selling birth
certificates and identity documents. I therefore join you in commending the
people of KwaZulu-Natal for rooting out these corrupt elements in the
province.

I also want to add that we do have an Anti-Corruption Government Strategy,
which is led by the Minister for the Public Service and Administration. She
participates in several international fora, and has convened several
national summits within the country where government participates, together
with civil society, to try to grapple with the challenges facing all of us
– that of corruption in the country.

The second issue that I would like to comment on is Zimbabwe. A comment has
been made on the issue of Zimbabwe and that we see a number of people
streaming into South Africa now that Zimbabwe is facing elections and that
perhaps the quiet diplomacy strategy has not worked. But I do want to say
that we should always remember: Mediation efforts or no mediation efforts,
at the end of the day, the fate of the Zimbabwean people is in their own
hands. Zimbabweans must find a solution to their problems.

As far as we are concerned, we are happy that SADC gave the responsibility
to the President of our Republic to try and mediate and find a solution to
what is happening in Zimbabwe. But, at the end of the day, Zimbabweans must
find a way of resolving their problems and they have to ensure, by the way,
that they have successful elections in their country. [Applause.]
                       ATTACK ON WOMAN BY TAXI DRIVERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Deputy
Speaker, I wish to respond to the hon Vundisa, who again raised a question
about the taxi rank incident. I would like to urge the country as a whole
that unless each and every one of us stands up and condemns such sexist and
racist behaviour in this country, it is going to set us back. Do not raise
issues that affect your constituency only, but raise issues that affect the
entire nation. We will one day live to regret this.

Black women in this country have been at the bottom of the ladder in the
past. After 1994 some of their burdens were removed but some still remain.
Women in this country somehow gained their human dignity.

I therefore wish to challenge all men across all parties here not to sit
idle, but to be seen to be actively condemning this barbaric behaviour. It
should not be only women who protest at these discriminating deeds. We
therefore call upon all organisations to condemn this behaviour in the
strongest terms.

I therefore wish to challenge Comrade Vundisa that he should actually lead
a march to the taxi rank with all the male MPs who are sitting here today.

                             ANTIDUMPING DUTIES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Deputy Speaker,
I just want to respond to the statement made by the hon Labuschagne. In
fact, the hon Turok made a statement very similar to it a few days ago and
we responded to that. But the issue is that with regard to the antidumping
duties a problem has been caused by a ruling of our courts and it has to do
with the time period which is allowed for the imposition of antidumping
duties.

WTO rules say that it is five years, and the issue at stake has been
whether the period of five years starts when you impose a provisional duty
or whether it starts when you impose a final duty after a determination. We
have been counting it from the time of the imposition of the final duty and
the court ruled that the five years had to start when you started with the
provisional duty.

There are a number of options, including some which have been proposed by
stakeholders. They all have pros and cons and Itac has put out a proposal
of its own for public consultation. It still has to come back with the
results of that consultation and the Ministry still has to interact with
Itac on that matter. But, the assurance that we can give is that subject to
the rules of the WTO and subject to the rulings of our own courts, we will
continue to use antidumping measures as an instrument to defend our
domestic producers against unfair competition from dumped imported goods.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                               STANDARDS BILL
            NATIONAL REGULATOR FOR COMPULSORY SPECIFICATIONS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is my
privilege to introduce to the House the Standards Bill of 2007 and the
National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill of 2007.

The genesis of this legislation flows from policy developed by the
Department of Trade and Industry for the modernisation of South Africa’s
technical infrastructure, commonly known as Standards, Quality Assurance,
Accreditation and Metrology, or SQAM. These improvements are necessary to
better support an economy that is growing, that is diverse and that is
experiencing the deepening of value addition.

You will recall, hon members, that in 2006 we requested that you consider
legislation with respect to the accreditation for conformity assessment,
calibration and good laboratory practice, as well as measurement units and
measurement standards, which were subsequently enacted on 1 May 2007.

The legislation tabled today proposes to complete the legislative process
envisaged in that policy. The Standards Bill deals with standards and
conformity assessment and that means testing, certification and inspection
for compliance with standards. The National Regulator for Compulsory
Specifications Bill in turn deals with compulsory standards that are used
to protect the health and safety of the public and the environment.

The SA Bureau of Standards is currently responsible for all three of these
tasks. In this regard there is concern regarding conflicts of interest in
terms of the SABS being the standards developer, the regulator of
compulsory standards and the provider of conformity assessment services
which are used by manufacturers to prove compliance.

Government therefore identified the need for the reconfiguration of the
current SA Bureau of Standards into two separate public entities. It is now
proposed that these entities, building on the strong foundation of the SA
Bureau of Standards developed over six decades, fulfil certain functions
previously executed by the SABS and acquire certain additional functions as
determined by the needs of our economy.

In summary, the one public entity will be responsible for standards and
conformity assessment services and the other for technical regulations.

The importance of SA national standards cannot be underestimated. Standards
link markets, thereby enlarging them. These standards allow for better
consumer choice by simplifying and facilitating better information on goods
in the marketplace. Standards provide a means of expressing requirements
and the ways in which these can be tested and evaluated. Standards can also
enable technology transfer in support of economic growth.

Furthermore, standards respond to the need of the private sector for
certainty in quality and performance, and respond to the needs of all our
citizens for protection against unsafe, unhealthy or dangerous goods.
Generally, the use of standards is voluntary; however it can be made
mandatory through legislative mechanisms where government intervention is
necessary for an effective and fair market.

It is the usual practice for a country to have one authoritative body
responsible for standardisation. This practice is based on the rationale
that standards form an important element of economic policy, and the
process to generate them therefore needs to be appropriately guided, based
on national needs. In addition, it is important to have a nominated
standards body to represent a country internationally.

It is within this context that I am introducing the Standards Bill.


The purpose of the Standards Bill is to provide for the continuation of the
SA Bureau of Standards as the top national institution responsible for the
development, promotion and maintenance of SA national standards. The Bill
also provides a legal framework for the development, promotion and
maintenance of SA national standards and the rendering of conformity
assessment services and related activities.





This Bill also enables other standards development organisations that
comply with specific requirements and that deal with specific areas of
standardisation to publish their standards as SA national standards. This
will allow for the development of more SA national standards.





In addition, the Bill mandates the SABS to participate in the two key
international standardisation bodies, namely the International Standards
Organisation, ISO, and the International Electrotechnical Committee or IEC.
The ISO is a worldwide federation of national standards bodies with a
membership of 157 countries. The ISO’s work results in international
consensus documents that are published as international standards.





The scope of the ISO covers all fields of standardisation except electrical
and electronic engineering standards, which are the responsibility of the
IEC. Together the ISO and the IEC form the world’s largest non-governmental
system for voluntary industrial and technical collaboration at an
international level. Participation in these international bodies is
therefore critical to our trade interests.




We have brought this Bill for your consideration as it is our view that a
new, reconstituted SABS will be better placed to focus attention on the
important standards development responsibility as well as the related
conformity assessment activities. In so doing the new SABS will service a
range of customers, including regulators in general and the new National
Regulator for Compulsory Specifications in particular, through the
incorporation of standards into law and as a conformity assessment service
provider.



Madam Deputy Speaker, with your permission I now proceed to introduce the
National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill. The purpose of this
Bill is to provide for a separate legal framework for the administration
and maintenance of compulsory specifications in the interests of public
safety, health, or environmental protection in South Africa; and to
establish the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications to
administer compulsory specifications. This Bill will thus change the
corporate form of the current regulatory division within the SABS by
establishing it as an independent public entity.




These compulsory specifications, also called technical regulations, cover
the automotive, electrotechnical, mechanical, health-related, building and
construction materials, food and associated industries, as well as the
environmental protection sectors. An example of a proposed compulsory
specification that is currently being developed and is relevant to all of
us is the regulation for energy-efficient lamps. The aim of this regulation
is to ensure that the energy-efficient light bulbs available to consumers
will be safe, and meet performance criteria in terms of minimum output as
well as lifespan. The applicable SA national standard will be used as a
basis for this compulsory specification.




The Bill furthermore provides for the continued use of SA national
standards as the basis for compulsory regulations. Other provisions will
effect the shifting of the administration of technical regulations by
transferring the administrative elements that are relevant to compulsory
specifications from the current Standards Act to the new Bill.

The Bill therefore makes provision for the implementation and
administration of all aspects of compulsory specifications. These include
approvals, inspections and market surveillance as well as sanctions at
appropriate levels to deter abuse of regulations.

Finally, the Bill will also provide for the levelling of the playing field
for all competent conformity assessment service providers by ensuring that
accreditation becomes a prerequisite for the provision of conformity
assessment services.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to acknowledge and
thank the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry for facilitating the
public hearings and for the committee’s substantive inputs.

These contributions dealt with, amongst others, the proposed number of
members of the respective boards, which were considered to be too large
when taking the current SABS board size into account. We therefore now
propose that board membership numbers be reduced from the initial proposal
of 10-13 to between seven and nine board members.

Furthermore, with regard to the Standards Bill, the committee agreed that
it was necessary to include a new clause on the incorporation of SA
national standards in law.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I wish to reiterate that the Bills we have tabled
today are critical to the further strengthening of an enabling legislative
environment for a modern South African technical infrastructure. I commend
these Bills to the House. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms D M RAMODIBE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen,
why do standards matter in a country? In order for us to have a better
understanding as to why standards matter in a country, we have to
understand that the link between standards, technical regulations and trade
is crucial in the design of broader development programmes that can create
new opportunities for supporting poor growth.

Standards and technical regulations define what can or cannot be exchanged
and outline the procedures under which such exchanges are or are not
permissible. The need to develop standards is being driven by global
competition that we, as a country, are part of. Global competition has
become intensified in terms of price, quality, supply chain management and
dependability of delivery systems. Consumer preferences influenced by
increased income, health and other social concerns and demand for quality
products are also changing the way suppliers and producers respond to
market signals.

Changing consumer demand is putting pressure on national and international
standards development and regulatory agencies to become more active in
supporting the private sector and ensuring compliance. We all know that
consumer confidence in the regulatory capacity of both domestic and
international agencies is slowly diminishing as a result of health-related
products that have emerged in recent years.

Consumers are demanding more information about products – chemical content
in foods and production processes. It is, therefore, imperative that, as we
consider passing this Bill, we should ensure that it meets its objectives
and beyond by improving the quality of life of the people ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, the level of noise is
extremely high now. Could we please respect the dignity of the House? I
thank you.

Ms D M RAMODIBE: ... creates a shared consumption benefit for the public
and solves common product and quality problems. We also need to ensure that
standards are well-defined, as they can facilitate trade by reducing
transactions and other costs, including cost information about the quality
of goods or services and associated risks, and improve linkages between
firms across industries.

With the passing of the Bill, we want to see the following challenges being
addressed and we hope this will be the case as we implement the Bill: Lack
of transparency in technical regulations, which hinders local trade
particularly in the small, medium and micro enterprises sector or SMMEs;
and the difficulty and time-consuming consultation of technical regulations
contained in the legislation – there is no way of measuring the
effectiveness of technical regulations contained in the legislation.

We further believe that the passing of the Bill into law will assist in
providing an integrated framework of government action and public-private
partnership that was lacking, and that the board will place emphasis on
surveillance and monitoring of data, human resources and law enforcement
capacity. There can be no doubt that South Africa has committed itself to
participate fully in the international arena in as far as the development
of standards is concerned.

We do, as a country, possess the necessary institutional framework and
infrastructure to participate in and adhere to international regulations
and standards. We need to continue the drive to assist SMMEs to become part
and parcel of not only domestic economic activities but also the
international trade arena by providing assistance to enhance their ability
to comply with regulations and standards. The ANC supports the Bill. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairman, the DA supports the Standards Bill and this
particular Bill emanates from the Department of Trade and Industry. Its aim
is to restructure the SA technical infrastructure and to optimise the SA
Standards, Quality Assurance, Accreditation and Metrology system.
South Africa is an accepted member of the international standardisation
system that continues to support the needs of South African enterprises
competing in a fast-paced global economy. The Portfolio Committee on Trade
and Industry discussed the Standards Bill in depth.

Chairperson, allow me to thank all the members of the committee for their
worthy contributions. Allow me also to thank my colleague, Mr Les
Labuschagne, for his contribution regarding the establishment and
composition of the board of the SA Bureau of Standards, SABS. The proposal
that the board consists of not less than seven and not more than nine
members was supported by all the members of the committee.

The export of manufactured goods is the lifeline of the South African
economy. The recent increase in electricity and fuel levies could increase
input costs, which could result in an increase in inflationary harm. The
good news, however, is that the rand’s fall against the dollar in the past
four months could give our manufacturing sector a lift, because export
industries will not be the only ones to benefit from the weakening of the
rand. Domestic firms using imported components will try to evade the higher
import costs by sourcing local producers.

This is only possible if the maintenance of the SABS as an internationally
recognised standard and a crucial element of a well-functioning technical
infrastructure of this country continues. A number of variables are
extremely important to allow one export article to attain a competitive
advantage over another.

Gehalte en ’n goeie prys vir goedere in die internasionale arena kan slegs
verkry word indien die produk deur internasionaal erkende regulatoriese
standaarde getoets en ondersteun word. Die SA Buro van Standaarde is van
sleutelbelang vir die ganse ekonomie van Suid-Afrika. Hierdie wetsontwerp
skei slegs die regulatoriese sy van die SABS van die administratiewe
gedeelte, wat in pas is met verwikkelings van dié aard onder die meeste van
ons handelsvennote. Die DA is ’n politieke party wat hom verbind tot
ekonomiese groei en die bekamping van armoede. Ons betoog vanmiddag is dit:
laat die SABS, soos in die verlede, voortgaan om ‘n voortreflike
wetenskaplike internasionale diens aan die nywerheid in al sy fasette te
lewer.

Die SABS moet egter nooit vir korttermyn politieke gewin gebruik word nie,
want dit kan onberekenbare skade aan die vervaardigingsektor van Suid-
Afrika aanrig, wat miskien dekades kan neem om verlore aansien te herwin
indien dit wel sou gebeur. Mnr die Voorsitter, ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Quality and a good price for goods in the international arena can only be
achieved if products are tested and supported by internationally recognised
regulatory standards. The SA Bureau of Standards is of crucial importance
to the entire South African economy. This Bill merely separates the
regulatory side of the SABS from its administrative part, and this is in
keeping with similar developments among most of our international trading
partners.

The DA is a political party committed to economic growth and to the fight
against poverty. Our plea this afternoon is this: Let the SABS continue to
provide excellent scientific services to industry in all its facets, as it
has done in the past.

However, the SABS must never be used for short-term political gain, because
this would cause incalculable harm to the manufacturing sector of South
Africa, and this could lead to its taking decades to rebuild a shattered
reputation. Chairperson, I thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon E S Chang. [Interjections.] Hon
members, if you think you are whispering, you are still definitely audible
from where I am seated.

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson, hon Minister, the technical infrastructure
review which was conducted in 2001 resulted in the Policy on Modernising
the South African Technical Infrastructure. These two Bills before us today
are very important as they are the final elements of this important policy
implementation process. This process is needed if we are to ensure that our
products are up to international standards in this era of globalisation.

I have no doubt that the modernisation process will benefit all South
Africans, including the business community and consumers, as well as place
South Africa on a higher standing internationally with regard to the
quality of products that leave our shores. Our products will be of a
certain quality and adhere to strict standards and specifications.

The IFP welcomes the Standards Bill as it allows for the continued
existence of the SA Bureau of Standards, the SABS, as our national
standardisation institute. In this fast-paced global economy, we in South
Africa need to ensure that our products and services are characterised by
high quality and excellence. We need to promote our own brand, the South
African brand, as a country.

This Bill brings the SABS in line with international norms as the
responsibility for the administration of technical regulations will no
longer lie with the SABS, and this will now allow it to concentrate on the
development and maintenance of standards and the provision of conformity
assessment services.

The SABS’s current combination of responsibilities is not in line with
certain international requirements, and creates a conflict of interest in
terms of providing conformity assessment services for technical regulations
while also administering technical regulations. There is clearly a need for
two separate organisations.

The National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill ensures that
there will be a separation of powers with the establishment of the National
Regulator for Compulsory Specifications, which will now administer the
technical regulations and make provision for the implementation and
administration of all aspects of compulsory specifications. The mandate of
this national regulator is to promote public safety and enhance consumer
protection through the enforcement of compulsory minimum standards for the
safety and performance of products and services.

These two Bills will go a long way to ensure that our products are of the
highest quality. The IFP supports the Bills. [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, on behalf of the ACDP, I would like to speak in
favour of the Standards Bill and the National Regulator for Compulsory
Specifications Bill, which are before the House today.

It is the overall perception that standards in South Africa are dropping.
The mark of the SA Bureau of Standards has for a very long time been the
mark by which people and business would determine their satisfaction with
products before they spent money on them. The ACDP is therefore satisfied
that the SABS will continue to exist as a public entity, notwithstanding a
repeal of the Standards Act, Act 29 of 1993.

South Africa needs the objectives as set out in the Bill for the SABS, and
those set out for the National Regulator in the National Regulator for
Compulsory Specifications Bill. The SABS promotes and maintains South
Africa’s national standards, promotes the quality of commodities, products
and services and renders conformity assessment services in connection
therewith.

The National Regulator is hereby established as a public entity and has the
following objectives: to make recommendations to the Minister with regard
to compulsory specifications, to carry out market surveillance through
inspections and monitoring of compliance, and to enforce compliance with
compulsory specifications.

The Bills also stipulate the establishment of the operating procedures of
boards, conditions for appointment to the boards, and also the criteria for
disqualifications.

The ACDP believes that the functioning of these two entities will ensure
that high standards will prevail in South Africa, and that South African
standards will prevail throughout the world. The ACDP supports the Bills
before us.

Mr S M RASMENI: Chairperson, Ministers and hon members, the tabling of the
Standards Bill before Parliament is not a coincidence, but is informed by
the need to accelerate transformation to ensure a better life for all. We
resolved in Polokwane, during the ANC national conference, that we need to
build the technical capacity of the state to engage with, understand and
lead the development of dynamic and globally integrated economic sectors.

The Bill before the House, the Standards Bill, repeals the Standards Act,
Act 29 of 1993, and creates the SA Bureau of Standards which is focused and
operates optimally in pursuit of the national interest in that it has
strategic direction and is properly co-ordinated. It aims to provide for
the use of measurement units of the International System of Units and
certain other measurement units. It will also provide for the keeping and
maintenance of national measurements, standards and units.

Some of the objectives of the Bill are: to look at the need for an
international metrology system as the foundation for the South African
measurement system; the need to strengthen the metrology system as a key
component of the technical infrastructure that is aligned with
international best practice; the need to support our enterprises competing
in a fast-paced global economy; and the need for public policy objectives
with regard to compliance issues in terms of the health and safety
environment.

Indeed, the Department of Trade and Industry also took instructions from
the President of the Republic when he addressed us on the main categories
of the Apex Priorities during the state of the nation address. I quote:


  ... the further acceleration of our economic growth and development, and
  speeding up the process of building the infrastructure we need to achieve
  our economic and social goals ...

The role of the SABS is to offer standardisation services on an ethical and
principled basis that uplifts the national standards and empowers South
African industry to compete vigorously towards increased market access. In
doing so, the SABS contributes to economic growth in the region. We are
confident that with this Bill passed by Parliament, the SABS will live up
to these challenges.

The committee process took us a few weeks to deliberate on the Bill, and
amendments were made. I want to specifically reflect on the amendment of
the composition of the board. The department recommended that the board
should consist of between 10 and 13 people. This was rejected unanimously
by the committee, and we settled for between seven and nine people to
constitute the board.

I must also mention that we cautioned the department not to appoint
individuals to this board who would be found serving on other boards or
institutions, as is the case in government, with the result that such board
members would fail to exercise their duties because their attention would
be divided between matters of importance.

We in this committee support the passing of this Bill. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Chairperson, I just want to beg for your indulgence a
little bit because I think it is important that I say something regarding
my constituency. On behalf of my constituency in Atlantis, the ANC wishes
to express its deepest condolences on the tragic death of a number of
people from Atlantis, Malmesbury and other areas as a result of vehicle
accidents that happened over the past two weeks. We are seriously concerned
about these untimely deaths of mainly young people, and call on the Metro
Police, the city law enforcement governed by the DA coalition in the City
of Cape Town, to please ensure that we have these officers active in our
areas.

I need to say that most of these law enforcement officers are deployed to
the city centre over weekends and nothing happens in our own townships -
and we’re asking ourselves if our lives are less important than the lives
of the people in the city.

So please ... “met `n groot asseblief” [pretty please] ... we beg you to do
something because we cannot lose lives every weekend. [Interjections.] They
are there but they cannot handle all these things.

On a more positive note, today marks a very special highlight on the
calendar of the constituency in Atlantis. Our desire to better our lives
has become so urgent that our community leaders came together to launch an
education and training forum. We want to uphold the values espoused by
government to engage in skills development. We thought this education and
training forum would assist in the process, and also improve our social and
material conditions.

I want to congratulate them on this giant leap and wish to express my
gratitude to the Atlantis Economic Development Trust led by CEO, Charles
Titus, Mr Martinus, Chairperson of the Principals’ Forum, and of course our
stalwart in education, Mr Quinton Newman, who initially took this bold
step.

May you grow from strength to strength and you dare not fail us because you
would be failing our children, youth, community and our country at large.
We just want to say that we are very proud of the initiative taken by the
people of Atlantis.

To come back to the issue at hand, the National Regulator for Compulsory
Specifications Bill makes provision for the establishment of the National
Regulator for Compulsory Specifications of South Africa. It makes provision
for the administration and maintenance of compulsory specifications, public
safety, health and the protection of our environment.

This Bill further makes provision for market surveillance by the National
Regulator to ensure that there’s compliance with the compulsory
specifications and to provide for sanctions for noncompliance with
compulsory specifications. Lastly, it makes provision for the appointment
of the board of the National Regulator.

The objectives of the National Regulator are to make recommendations to the
Minister with regard to compulsory specifications, administer and maintain
compulsory specifications, and enforce compliance with the compulsory
specifications in accordance with the Act. In order for the National
Regulator to achieve its objective, it must acquire and maintain the
equipment required for market surveillances and inspection purposes,
establish and maintain the necessary expertise required on an
internationally acceptable level, and inform South African commerce,
industry and the public at large about the compulsory specifications. It is
important for the National Regulator to obtain membership of or to
participate in or develop relationships with foreign and international
bodies who share the same objectives as our National Regulator for it to be
on a par with international standards. The National Regulator must enter
into agreements with service providers who conform to the necessary
requirements; it must further establish specialist consultative committees
to provide input into the process to interpret and implement compulsory
specifications.

The portfolio committee was very happy that the department could agree to a
reduction in the number of members to be appointed to the National
Regulator Board from between 10 and 13 to a minimum of seven and a maximum
of 10 instead.

What is significant in this Bill is that it gives the National Regulator
the necessary powers to monitor and enforce compliance with the Act, for
example, it can at any time take a sample of any component, test and
analyse it and see if it complies with the necessary specifications.

I move for the adoption of the National Regulator for Compulsory
Specifications Bill. Thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the MF acknowledges that the new Standards Bill
will continue to employ the South African Bureau of Standards as a public
entity. We respect that certain technical regulatory responsibilities have
been removed and that the board would grow in size.

We sincerely hope that these provisions will assist the South African
Bureau of Standards in further supporting the development of trade and
industry, both nationally and internationally.
The SABS has a technical mandate to uphold the management of the standard
of goods and its South African stamp of approval, bringing us in line with
national standards globally. The MF is pleased that this will further
ensure that our operations are in line with the World Trade Organisation.

We are pleased that these changes do ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, may I speak. I’ve been
really pleading for quietness – I would then have to use my prerogative and
really name or call whoever I think is disturbing the order of the House.
Please, let’s be in order. Hon member, continue.

Mr R B BHOOLA: We are pleased that these changes do not affect the
employment constitution of the body and that job safety has been
prioritised.

The fact that we are prioritising the standard of goods and their safety is
an assurance to the consumer of the quality of goods traded.

As we know, the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill has
been introduced to administer technical regulations regarding standards. It
appears to deal with technical regulations relating to approvals,
inspections and market surveillance inspections.

The MF sincerely hopes for the effective transfer of administration that is
relevant to compulsory specifications between the two Bills. The MF finds
the National Resources Conservation Service assessment methods to be
comprehensive and promising in delivery.

We respect that the NRCS will be the accounting authority but we consider
it necessary that it should be an oversight body in this regard. We are
supportive of the regulatory body that previously existed under the
Standards Bill being shifted to the NRCS, bringing us in line with global
trends. We hope for an improvement in the quality of standards in South
Africa and our representation abroad. The MF supports both the Bills. Thank
you.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Chairperson, we have before us the National Regulator
for Compulsory Specifications Bill which, together with the Standards Bill,
constitutes the last of a series of Bills presented by the Department of
Trade and Industry to restructure the South African technical regulatory
infrastructure and optimise the South African Standards, Quality Assurance,
Accreditation and Metrology system. We previously passed legislation
establishing the SA National Accreditation System and the Metrology
Institute.

It is a fact that we live in a global village today, whether we like it or
not. It is up to us to take cognisance and adjust. We have institutions
today that regulate and influence trade, the World Trade Organisation and a
myriad of bi- and multilateral international instruments in this regard.
Relations with the European Union, SADC and the Customs Union all impact on
our trading and commercial relations. We have to be internationally
competitive and develop our exports accordingly. We are no longer just a
quarry and a farm, but we are an important manufacturing and exporting
country.

To enable us to compete in a competitive world it is of cardinal importance
that our technical regulatory infrastructure adapts to and is aligned with
international best practice. Brand South Africa must not only be up there
with the best because it is necessary, but because we also deserve it.

The world must be confident that when they receive a product from South
Africa, the measurement quality and standards are world-class. Our word or
our standards must be our bond.

It is with this in mind that this Bill, which establishes the National
Regulator for Compulsory Specifications, will play a cardinal role in the
administration and maintenance of compulsory specifications and the
implementation of a regulatory and compliance system, and also provide
sanctions for non-compliance. Any regulator needs teeth.

It is important to note that the specifications referred to are in the
interest of public safety and health or for environmental protection. The
two former interests are self-evident, but the concept of environmental
protection is relatively new and indeed necessary in view of the many
environmental challenges that face not only the global community in
general, but our country in particular.

In a sense nothing new is created, in that there was a world-class
regulatory department as part of the SABS and the work continues, but in a
better organised structure for greater efficiency. The DA supports the
Bill. [Applause.]

Mr J J MAAKE: Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, fellow Members
of Parliament, the Bill before us today, the National Regulator for
Compulsory Specifications Bill, seeks to establish a public entity
responsible for compulsory specifications. The National Regulator for
Compulsory Specifications Bill will be responsible for the protection of
the health and safety of the public and the environment through the
administration and maintenance of compulsory specification in the interest
of public safety, health or environmental protection.

In keeping with international trends, the current regulatory division
within the SA Bureau of Standards is to be separated from the SABS as
standard writer and conformity assessment service provider. The objectives
are to promote the rights and obligations of government and to protect the
health and safety of the public and the environment. The Bill will also
provide for market surveillance by the National Regulator in order to
ensure compliance with the compulsory specifications and to provide for
sanctions for non-compliance with compulsory specifications.

All the legal jargon above simply means that the National Regulator for
Compulsory Specifications Bill has been created to administer technical
regulations, of which there are about 70, that cover automotives and
automotive components, fish, canned meat and fish, electrical and
electronic products and components, and environmental and personal safety
products. The Bill will transfer the administrative elements that are
relevant to compulsory specifications from the Standards Act to the new
National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill.

In terms of the current mandate, the SABS is responsible for three
activities: The promotion, development and maintenance of national
standards, the provision of conformity assessment services and the
administration of compulsory specification that are largely from the DTI’s
regulation of products and processes.

The current combination of responsibilities is not in line with the WTO
requirements. It creates a conflict of interest in terms of providing
conformity assessment services for technical regulations and administering
technical regulations at the same time, which is sometimes very surprising
because products are harvested from Africa and conformity standards are
then imposed on us.

An example might be a simple thing like chloroquine. It is made from an
African herb which is very bitter. The pill is still very bitter even
today, but the standards of the herb which we, as Africans, have used since
time immemorial, are from Europe. Whilst we cured the disease in Africa, in
Europe it was still called “bad air”. Mal means bad; malaria,
maladministration, malnutrition. Mal means bad! So, in Europe it was called
“mal aria” which simply means “bad air” because they couldn’t cure it.

I remember standing at this podium when we were debating the Standards
Bill. I said that standards need to apply to political parties too. The
National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill talks about
conforming to compulsory specification and this is done for purposes of
maintaining public safety and health and protecting environment. All this
is in the public interest. What the opposition is always doing, which I
always doubt is in the public interest – arises because their definition of
the public is skewed. We are therefore appealing to the opposition to
direct their surveillance in the public interest.
The provisions of this Bill require of us to approve, inspect and market
surveillance as well as sanctions at appropriate levels in order to deter
the abuse of these regulations. The opposition will need to help in this
regard in the interests of public safety and health and protection of the
environment and stop conducting surveillance on politicians and let us be
one as South Africans, at least this time.

Let the opposition stop focusing on Zimbabwe whilst their own country is in
need of their help. The ANC supports the Bill. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I would like to thank all
the members from different parties for the overwhelming support that they
have given to these two Bills. I think it is a very good start for the
country because these are critical Bills that will enable us to respond to
the pressures and challenges of globalisation.

They will also enable us to respond to the challenges of industrial
development and industrial upgrading, which are critical challenges facing
South Africa, to ensure that we can deepen and improve our manufacturing
and enhance value addition.

I would like to thank the hon Labuschagne for attending the launch of the
Metrology Institute, the other night. You will recall that on that occasion
I did say that the critical challenge is going to be to make these
disciplines commonplace and make them understandable to ordinary people so
that people understand that the bread they buy measures up to the standard,
the products they consume are safe and the appliances they use also meet
the specifications. So, this is what I see as an important challenge.

Of course, hon Maake, we will work on the matter of developing a
specification and a standard for political parties. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Standards Bill read a second time.

National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill read a second time.

                      TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION AGENCY BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, hon members, the
Technology Innovation Agency Bill forms part of our country’s ongoing
effort to address the challenges presented by the gap between the local
knowledge base and the translation of knowledge into products and services
which we commonly refer to as the “innovation chasm”.

The concept of the TIA – Technology Innovation Agency – was mooted in the
1996 White Paper on Science and Technology. It was developed and raised
again in the 2002 national research and development strategy.

While our country’s science system has evolved significantly since this
time, five years of careful monitoring of the outputs of South Africa’s
national system of innovation has provided solid evidence that the system
is operating suboptimally. This claim is supported by local evidence, the
findings of a qualitative survey of lost opportunities in technology
development and a further study conducted last year by my department which
compares our system with international best practice.

In addition, the need for an agency like the TIA was explicitly emphasised
by the 2007 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in its
review of South Africa’s science system. The OECD report claims that,
“South Africa could usefully establish a Nordic style innovation agency to
bring together strategic research and innovation measures and to develop
capabilities both of the productive sector and the knowledge
infrastructure.” Cumulatively, these findings and recommendations emphasise
the need for a new approach to stimulate innovation in our country.
The establishment of the TIA will enhance our ability to realise the
objectives of our 10-year innovation plan, which outlines the principle
challenges to be addressed by our science system if we are to successfully
realise our transformation to a knowledge economy.

South Africa’s innovation system has developed a substantive repository of
local knowledge, but currently this has minimal influence on the real
economy. This situation is exacerbated by a number of impediments to
productivity and technological innovation, which include market
inefficiencies, a lack of access to adequate financing, as well as a
relatively weak and unco-ordinated intellectual property rights management
framework.

Over the years, this situation has contributed to the loss of a number of
great South African technologies to the developed world. One glaring
example is the electric vehicle hype in the world today, which uses a South
African-developed lithium battery technology that left our shores for the
United States of America two decades ago. Also, as recently as two years
ago, we lost our own thin-film solar-cell technology to Germany.

Such losses are largely due to the lack of dedicated funding mechanisms for
technology development, and the subsequent commercialisation strategy
within our own country. It is this development gap in the local market that
the establishment of the Technology Innovation Agency aims to fill.
From the financial and institutional point of view, the establishment of
the agency will build on existing capacity. Specifically, the funding
instruments that have already been established, such as the Innovation Fund
and the Biotechnology Innovation Centres, will be incorporated into and
further refined by the agency in a manner that extracts synergies from
existing relationships and infrastructure to ensure the rapid acceleration
of commercialisation of knowledge.

The Bill provides for the establishment of the Technology Innovation Agency
as a new public entity. The primary objective of the agency is to stimulate
and intensify technological innovation for the purposes of improving our
economic growth, and thereby enhancing the quality of life of our people.
The agency is intended to develop and support local technological
inventions and innovations, and create an enabling environment for their
commercialisation.

The Bill further provides for the appointment of the TIA board, the CEO and
staff, and sets out the powers and functions of the agency, which include,
among other things, to provide financial assistance to people, consortia or
enterprises in order to enable them to develop and commercialise their
technological innovations and inventions; and to draw together and
integrate the management of disparate technological innovation initiatives
that are specifically at the technology development stage.

Our approach towards creating an environment that stimulates and exploits
local technological innovation is based on our belief that such innovations
should create sustainable and long-term economic growth. Moreover, our
increasing investment in research and development must result in tangible
benefits for our society.

Drawing on international experiences in this regard, and taking into
account South Africa’s own challenges in managing the innovation chain, the
form, function and objectives of the TIA are those of a public institution
intended to develop a significant and commercially viable technology base
for the country by, one, stimulating the development of technology-based
products and services; two, providing an interface for and promoting active
collaboration between government, industry, academia and international
sources of foreign direct investment; three, actively managing the
development of technologies to ensure success in the market; four,
facilitating the development of human capital to drive innovation; five,
connecting technology entrepreneurs and enterprises to downstream funding
opportunities and global markets; and, six, increasing South Africa’s
exports of value-added and finished goods.

Our national system of innovation is characterised by strong private-sector
research and development funding flows. According to a report produced by
the National Advisory Council on Innovation in July 2006, the business
sector is the dominant R&D actor in the country, funding approximately 45%
of all research and development and performing 58% of it.

According to the OECD, whose review report was received last year, “this
demonstrates that South Africa has an important platform of industrial R&D
competence upon which to build”. We see this as an environment that is
conducive to allowing us to actively connect the R&D performed at our
universities and research councils to these industrial opportunities.

Evidently all nations that have successfully made this connection, that is,
through entities like the proposed TIA, have amassed immeasurable economic
and social good. Pertinent examples include countries such as South Korea,
Singapore and Taiwan.

The governments of these countries created specific institutions to
proactively co-ordinate and align national innovation missions and
innovation support. Such institutions were typically set up to stimulate
the creation of new industries and enterprises, and provide the basis for
strengthening existing industries through the injection of new knowledge
and technologies.

Consultations and engagements on the TIA concept have been ongoing. But the
consultations on the business case and legislation intensified early in
2007. These interactions have taken a number of forms, including one-on-one
discussions with key role-players in the national system of innovation;
participation in and the hosting of national and international meetings,
seminars, conferences and group discussions; presentations to Cabinet and
sister departments; numerous calls for public comment on the draft
legislation; and written submissions and oral presentations to the
Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology.

On the basis of the consultations and comments received, we are comfortable
at this point that the establishment of the Technology Innovation Agency is
seen as a very positive intervention in the national system of innovation.

In closing, may I take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the
Deputy Minister of Science and Technology, the hon Derek Hanekom, the
portfolio committee led by the hon Godfrey Oliphant, the Director-General
of the Department of Science and Technology, Dr Phil Mjwara, and the
management and staff of my department for working as a team in the drafting
and consultation processes for this Bill.

I submit to the House the Technology Innovation Agency Bill for
consideration and approval. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, members and
guests, the Bill before us today is an establishment Bill for a new public
entity to be known as the Technology Innovation Agency. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. Could I ask the hon
member which guests he is referring to? I don’t see anybody in the gallery!
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): That’s not a point of order.
Continue, hon member.

Mr G G OLIPHANT: That’s why the DA cannot get votes - they can’t see the
voters. [Interjections.]

The Bill before us today is an establishment Bill for a new public entity
to be known as the Technology Innovation Agency.

It is essentially aimed at intensifying technological innovation by
stimulating the development of technology-based products and services;
supporting economic growth through the development of technology-based
enterprises, both public and private; and ultimately contributing to
enhancing the quality of life of all South Africans. The intention is thus
to enhance the country’s capacity for local innovation and to bridge the
innovation gap or chasm, as it is often referred to, between the local
knowledge base and the productive economy.

Let me take this opportunity, hon members, at the outset to thank the South
African public for the positive contributions we’ve received after
publishing the Bill for comment, as well as their active and constructive
engagement. The contributions received from various organisations,
institutions and individuals were valued and have greatly improved our
refining of this law. We sincerely appreciate all their efforts. In
particular, I want to recognise the support received from the Department of
Science and Technology team, under the leadership of Doctor Mjwara,
throughout the broad process of developing this Bill.

There are several provisions in the Bill. I’ll just highlight three of
them: The subsequent repeal of the Inventions Development Act of 1962; the
appointment of the board that the hon Minister of Science and Technology
referred to, which includes the staff and the chief executive officer; and
the funding of the agency.

In repealing the Inventions Development Act, all the assets and liabilities
of the SA Inventions Development Corporation, known as Saidcor, established
to provide for the purposes of this Act, will be transferred to the Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research. The portfolio committee has taken
into account the background and history of the relationship between these
entities and has acceded to that recommendation.

Another key success factor that will ensure that the agency functions
effectively is the hybrid funding model currently being explored between
the DST and Treasury, taking into account the provisions of the Public
Finance Management Act. The portfolio committee will be following these
developments very closely and we wish success to all the parties involved.
The committee is however concerned about the regulatory regime provided for
in the Bill. Special attention will be given to the implementation of the
investment framework policy in due course.

The Technology Innovation Agency will be there to support the development
of inventions beyond their early stage to the point of technology
demonstrators, prototypes and even pilot plants. This type of funding is
not usually available within the budgets of academic institutions and the
broader government-owned science system. Therefore, as is the case
currently, when the basic invention is attained, it either stagnates in the
system or goes to a third party which, in our history, has mostly been an
overseas investor willing to take such risks.

We must continue to unlock and support the creative ideas of our nation and
realise the benefit of its inventions, discoveries and designs. After all,
we have many successes and best practices that have stood the test of time.
We ultimately need to ensure that these innovations bridge the innovation
chasm and translate into products and services that contribute to the
development of all our people.
Let me now consider some examples, members. The Minister also referred in
his speech to the lithium battery. The lithium batteries that are in our
phones, in drills and in other power tools today, and which are already in
prototype and production cars in the United States, have a South African
invention from the CSIR at their core. Although money was earned for SA as
royalties, this was a very small fraction of what has been earned for the
Japanese and the US companies that were able to invest in the technology
and mature it to the point of having products in the marketplace.

Another example exists in the computer industry. There is an observation of
a trend known as Moore’s Law, which speaks to the fact that the number of
transistors on a chip will double about every two years. This has had
massive implications for efficiency and costs in the industry. The industry
has however expressed the view that this trend is coming to an end as it is
reaching a physical limitation with current technologies. A solution has
multibillion dollar implications for this industry. Please take advantage
of this.

There are, however, weaknesses. When a technology is developed, even to the
point of there being a prototype, there is still a lot of expense or
investment that is required to develop the plan on how the technology is
going to be translated into business. Without this essential step, the
possibility of engaging the private sector as a partner or ultimate owner
of technology usually fails.
There has historically been a lack of funding for this incubation process,
especially the investment needed to get technological products to the
market. There’ve also been instances where our technological innovations
have been appropriated and exploited by others internationally.

Another example - maybe I should end the examples now because time is
running out – is that there was not adequate funding. Let me leave that
point because of the time limits I have.

The critical challenge we put to the DST, science councils and associate
institutions is our pragmatically driven need for smart co-ordination of
science and technology activities in the national system of innovation.
This, we know, is a surmountable challenge and requires extra effort to
contribute to the broad Apex categories and speed up economic growth
relatively significantly.

It also requires a streamlined understanding of scientific work,
interdepartmental relationships and outputs in the various critical domains
like water and sanitation, housing, job creation, health, and safety and
security, to name but a few. There needs to be a consolidation of research
and development outcomes of entities and a wide spectrum of products,
systems and processes that ultimately reflect in the improvement of the
quality of life of all the people of South Africa.

The President, in his state of the nation address, referred to the Apex
Priorities that require priority attention. The TIA aims to support one of
the main Apex categories of furthering the acceleration of economic growth
and development. It intends to do so by providing the primary bridge
between the formal knowledge base and the real economy.

To conclude, it is essential therefore that we continue as a country to
address the skills shortages we face as a nation and ensure that we make
every effort to provide for the effective training of scientists and
engineers. We also need to enthusiastically monitor the strategic
collaboration between the DST and the National Research Foundation that
aims to significantly increase the number of Doctor of Philosophy degrees
within our national system of innovation. We should also ensure that
available skills are utilised to their maximum potential. Where this is not
happening, it should be corrected as a major priority as it ultimately
affects service delivery.

Finally, members, my sincere appreciation goes to the staff in the
committee section. Zelna, wherever you are, I thank you very much. I also
want to thank the parliamentary legal advisers and the state law advisers,
the secretaries to the Chairperson and the Whippery respectively, and a
special word of thanks surprisingly goes to all members of the portfolio
committee, which includes the ANC in particular. The DA supports this Bill.
The noise near me is fine. We enjoy it; it’s late in the day. I thank Azapo
for the support they have given throughout this process, and all the
members for their commitment and dedication throughout the processing of
this Bill. The ANC definitely supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Chairperson, the Bill before us was well-researched and
underwent a vigorous public participatory process, to the extent that
despite the closing date of 10 January 2008 the committee felt it necessary
to extend the date by a further two weeks. This was to accommodate those
stakeholders and academics who may have been away or unaware of the
gazetting of the Bill during the Christmas break.

To this end, the DA is grateful for this request being accommodated.
However, Bills, of course should not have been gazetted during December as
most institutions, businesses and universities are closed on holiday during
this period, raising concerns about whether full consultation could have
effectively taken place.

This Bill, according to the University of Pretoria, is significant in so
far as it has the real possibility of making South Africa a world player in
the development, manufacture and dissemination of technology products and
in so doing improving our ability to protect its intellectual property and
thus turning the tables on the negative trade balances which are presently
being experienced by our country.

What is required with this Bill is to bridge the innovation chasm through
providing a public mechanism to absorb the risk in the product development
part of the value chain. The DA believes that the direct funding of
projects through the TIA can further stimulate partnerships between the
private and public sectors, particularly at SMME level and in the promotion
of black economic empowerment initiatives.

However, the success of this funding would depend on the role the TIA plays
in handing over these technology products once the product has been
developed and their investment has hopefully been recovered. A clear policy
by the Department of Science and Technology will have to be developed along
the value chain to ensure that the equity held on behalf of the state must
have a defined exit strategy.

It is therefore pleasing to note that the Department’s Investment Policy
Framework and Guidelines actually addresses this particular aspect and in
particular the concerns raised that the TIA will become a profit-generating
vehicle as opposed to one that rather focuses on the long-term
sustainability and growth of the resources available to the TIA and
ultimately for its reinvestment back into the system.

Hanging on to these investments would also cause foreign direct investment
to shy away from putting capital into companies that have state involvement
in their boards or shareholdings. And that, I think, is an obvious issue.

It is important therefore that the board appointed by the Minister in
consultation with the National Assembly must have the necessary knowledge
and experience in technological innovation, technology management,
intellectual property and the commercialisation thereof, and the necessary
business skills which collectively should enable them to achieve the
objectives of the agency, whilst most importantly providing for good
governance.

There should be no conflicts of interest involved due to the sensitive
nature of discoveries or technological innovations, particularly prior to
their being registered under the Patent’s Act, and Parliament needs to be
vigilant in this regard. It is also therefore important that serving board
members do not impede the flexibility of an SMME and more specifically take
away their equity or royalties but rather empower them.

Paramount to the success of the TIA would be its ability to service the
interpreters swiftly and efficiently during the incubation period as delays
could result in a loss of opportunities to access overseas grants and FDIs,
which has been happening up to now. At the same time the TIA should not be
seen as competing with classic venture capital private equity funders.

To this end, the committee feels that it would be essential for the TIA to
apply for a hybrid schedule 3A/3B type exemption from the National Treasury
under the PMFA for it to be successful and to meet the demands put before
it for project financing. It is hoped that the Treasury will be sympathetic
to this request.

Finally, the DA believes that if we as Parliament are to be serious about
our oversight role then it is essential that regulations made by the
Minister - which ordinarily we do not see - are tabled in this House. This
matter was discussed with the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology
and although it was received sympathetically, it requires a policy decision
from the ANC caucus to make it a reality.

Too many regulations which are vested in Ministers and have a major bearing
on the financial and administrative capabilities of state-run operations
are taking place. And the TIA is no exception. Clause 16 of the Bill is a
case in point, where the Minister has direct influence in regulating
reserve funds and investments. I trust that our counterparts in the NCOP
will consider this matter before the Bill is finally passed.

The DA looks forward to the passing of the Bill and the opportunities it
will bring to South African entrepreneurs, but more importantly, the effect
it will have in overcoming the challenges of high poverty,
underdevelopment, decreasing agricultural output and the high prevalence of
disease which we encounter on a daily basis.

The Bill will harness the expertise and intellectual knowledge of high-tech
academic and industrial research on the one hand and the inventor,
entrepreneur, and traditional healer on the other, all of which could
benefit society and the world at large with their exciting innovations and
inventions. Maybe South Africa could even find a treatment for HIV/Aids,
malaria and other ailments using our indigenous plants. The opportunities
are endless and hopefully the TIA will be the catalyst to open up these
opportunities.

The DA will therefore be supporting this Bill. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chair, imagine a country in which most people understand
the way the world works and are clear-thinking individuals, with a spirit
of goodwill towards others. They recognize problems in their community and
respond to them creatively through art, constructive actions and innovative
technology. This should be the goal of an ideal technology innovation
agency fed into by a strong education system.

Countries prospering in the 21st century are investing hugely in education
and science and technology. This applies to India, China, Brazil, the US
and Taiwan. It should apply equally to South Africa.
The beauty of the TIA is that it has not been formulated to act as a Big
Brother, stamping a national agenda on all science and technology but as a
nurturing mother that will foster initiatives and try to bring to fruition
ideas that contribute to prosperity and well-being; not that the agency
shouldn't open eyes that are squinting down dark passages, a tendency in
our technology-obsessed modern world.

Nano-, bio- and information technology are for good reason hailed as modern
miracles, but they are being pursued with little respect for long-term
consequences. While it is not the job of the TIA to regulate, it should
embrace the precautionary principle as it chooses which innovators to
support.

Ironically, going forward may consist in going back to the indigenous
knowledge in which South Africa abounds. It is being greedily scavenged by
the outside world while here it remains secretly guarded by its holders who
see little value in sharing it.

South Africa has made its mark in every field of sophisticated science and
the TIA must accelerate this. But it is in the field of indigenous
knowledge that our contribution must be strengthened, through the right
intellectual property, benefit-sharing and ethical research done by
research institutes collaborating with healers and university scientists.

We rush headlong into genetic modification – GM - whereas we could foster a
myriad other agricultural technologies that retain biodiversity, are more
sustainable and promote human and animal health. We allow ourselves to be
sitting ducks in uncontrolled unethical experiments with cell phones and
masts which are not regulated by government and GM foods that are not
tracked.

We are a country lacking a vision in the fields of energy and health. We
sponsor nuclear and coal energy generation and waste unlimited free
resources of sun and geothermal energy from the sea. Research commissioned
by Eskom reveals that for less investment than is needed to build a power
station, the state could provide three times as many kilowatts of energy by
installing 2,5 million solar water heaters in homes.

Through initiatives like the TIA we must try to strike a balance between
new and old technology; between our largest energy source, the sun, and the
smallest atom; and between developing a vaccine for Aids and producing
products that keep people healthy.

The IFP warns against the board’s channelling of all venture capital
funding for innovation and allowing it to be stolen or wasted or to
stagnate while bureaucracy bubbles away. We also warn against the
disincentive to new businesses of the TIA sharing in their profits. We will
watch how the agency develops and appeal to civil society to do likewise.
As the millennium task force of the UN stated in a report commissioned by
Kofi Annan, a report which I commend to the board of the TIA, through
practical steps governments and international agencies have a unique
opportunity to use science, technology and innovation to improve the lives
of billions and meet Millennium Development Goals. For that we need good
intentions, knowledge, understanding and wisdom. We hope the TIA embodies
them all. The IFP support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, as implied by the hon President in the state of
the nation address, we must pave the way for the growth and development of
the economy, technology and advancement with the world through innovations.

South Africa may boast of a number of innovations used all over the world
and invented by our local scientists, engineers and inventors. We performed
the first heart transplant under the auspicious care of Professor Chris
Barnard. It was a South African physicist that developed the Computed Axial
Tomography scan, known as the CAT scan. Our Sasol is reported to be the
world’s finest oil-from-coal refinery, and the Kreepy Krauly pool cleaner,
as well as the pain relief Action Potential Simulation machine were all
made in South Africa. Let’s not forget that it was only Pratley Putty that
held together bits of the Apollo XI mission’s eagle landing craft which
went to the moon. However, the MF realises that there are far more
innovations that are waiting to be discovered on South African soil, and
that we have a responsibility to pave the way for them.

In the village of Kondivre in South India lived a man, Noordien Kaprey who,
with a little education and lots of imagination, built a gadget that would
prevent car accidents. It was discovered by some Germans, who took it from
him in the 1960s, and claimed it as their own. This man was never
reimbursed for his innovations and remained poor, fending for his family
through village trade, too afraid to allow his mind to guide his hands
again, too afraid to be exploited.

The MF is pleased that this Bill comes at a time when we are striving to
walk away from the times of exploitation. Let us open roads for innovation
in South Africa so that we may keep up with global trends and make our mark
as a global entity. In view of the provisions of the Bill, it appears very
promising in this regard. We sincerely hope that these benefits will be
made available in all corners of South Africa. The MF will support the
Bill.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, this is one of the most important Bills before
this Parliament. The PAC supports the Technology Innovation Agency Bill.
Its purpose is to facilitate discoveries, inventions, innovations and
improvements.

Because my time is very restricted, I simply want to say that our country,
like the rest of our continent, is endowed with enormous wealth. The riches
of our country and continent will never benefit us and be under our control
until we acquire the 21st century technology to advance our country and
continent technologically.

Today our diamonds, platinum, iron, gold and other raw materials are sold
back to us at 2000% because we lack the technology to process them here and
export them as finished goods to develop ourselves economically. The
majority of our population lives in abject poverty amidst the massive
riches of our country and continent. Eradication of poverty will not happen
until our school education capacitates us with the technological know-how.

Epistemology and indigenous knowledge show that our ancestors, even before
colonialism, were inventors. Today we are being bullied by those who have
bought our uranium cheaply and processed it into advanced technology, and
have become nuclear powers at our expense.

We are consuming everybody’s goods in the world. We are inventing very
little because of our backwardness in technology. We are more dependent
today than we were when we began the struggle for independence. We are
being oppressed and dominated with our own riches. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B T NGCOBO: Chairperson, as the South African Inventions Development
Corporation, established by the Inventions Development Act of 1962, is
being repealed, transitional provisions and savings are being taken care of
by disestablishment, deregistration in terms of the Companies Act of 1973,
and dissolution of the directors.

At the commencement of this Act, all rights, obligations, assets,
liabilities, patents and the sum of R3 000 from Technifene vest with the
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, the CSIR. Personnel will be
transferred to the CSIR in accordance with the Labour Relations Act of
1996.

The agency has been given powers and duties to provide early and second-
stage funding, in particular, and third and later stage in general, and to
further establish enterprises in accordance with the Companies Act and to
be able to develop and exploit technological innovations, and provide
support for persons undertaking such technological innovations. It would be
important for the agency to co-ordinate and integrate technological
innovations, incubation and diffusion initiatives in the country, and
further to develop human capital to address the existing skills shortage.

It would be important to apply for or revoke patents and institute legal
actions where patents and intellectual property rights have been infringed.
The agency will buy land and erect buildings so that they are able to do
their work in those buildings or assign land if and when necessary, and
will lend whichever land and property they are not using. It would also be
important for the agency to establish national and provincial offices in
consultation with the Minister.

As far as remuneration benefits and allowances for all categories are
concerned, the Minister may determine those in consultation with the
Minister of Finance. Regarding appointments, the Minister must appoint a
panel that will compile a short list of candidates for appointment as
members of the board after a transparent and competitive nomination
process. They must appoint members of the board, in consultation with the
National Assembly, on the basis of their knowledge, experience,
technological management, intellectual property, commercialisation and
business skills. When the aggregate of all this is considered collectively,
it should enable them to maintain the business of the agency.

The Minister may dissolve the board for mismanagement in accordance with
the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act of 2000, after which he or she
may appoint an interim body for the continued governance and control of the
affairs of the agency. The interim structure must not exceed six months, or
until the new board is appointed.

As far as the chief executive officer is concerned, the Minister will
appoint a CEO on the recommendation of the board, and this person will be
responsible for the administration, management and control of day-to-day
functioning of the agency, subject to the directions and instructions
issued by the agency. The term of office of the CEO will not exceed five
years. However, he or she will be eligible for re-appointment, but not for
more than two consecutive terms.

The board of the agency consists of the chairperson, the chief executive
officer, who is a non-voting member, and not less than six but not more
than nine members. The board must prepare an investment framework policy as
prescribed, which is reviewable annually. The committee will be vigilant
that the body is doing exactly what it is meant to do.

When members are disqualified from the board, it would be important that
one of the following criteria are met: Declared by a court of law as
mentally ill, as defined in the Mental Health Care Act; convicted of an
offence, or sentenced to imprisonment with the option of a fine; elected as
a member of the legislature, a councillor in a municipality or a delegate
to the National Council of Provinces; is a non-South African who cannot be
a member of the board; removed from a position of trust by a court of law;
is an unrehabilitated insolvent.

A member will be removed from or vacate his office on the grounds of
misconduct, inability to perform his duties efficiently, and being absent
from three consecutive meetings without the permission of the board. If a
member ceases to hold office or has a disqualification, the Minister may
appoint a person who meets the criteria of the board for that member’s
remaining term of office. The member may vacate his office on resignation
or on disqualification.

The term of office of the members of the board is four years, and they are
eligible for re-appointment, but they cannot serve more than two terms.
Meetings of the board should take place quarterly, or there should be four
meetings per year, with the chairperson presiding. In the absence of the
chairperson, members of the board must elect a chairperson from amongst
themselves.

The board determines the procedure of its meetings. The chairperson may
convene a meeting of the board, for which two-thirds of the members must
sign a written request within 14 days to convene a special meeting, and
convene such a meeting with a two-thirds quorum of members eligible to vote
at that meeting. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, Chair. I wish to thank
all the hon members for their support. We learnt a lot during the public
hearings. I was telling the chairperson of the portfolio committee that
when they called for a public hearing, we thought they were wasting their
time because, we thought, nobody was going to be interested in such a
technical Bill. But the interest was huge from role-players and the inputs
that they made helped a great deal to improve the Bill and make it better.
Even during this debate, we learnt quite a bit and some of the comments
made by hon members will be taken into account as we go forward.

The hon Rabinowitz says the TIA is a nurturing mother. I like that. It’s
really, really a beautiful image: The image of a mother nurturing, of
scientists nurturing, of our institutions nurturing, innovation nurturing,
enterprises nurturing, inventions nurturing and so on. So it’s wonderful.
We would like to see the TIA as exactly that, and not all the other things
that hon members might fear it might become as it goes forward.

It is a potentially huge leap forward for our country. We are closing a gap
that has been yawning for a very long time. We have been very good as a
country in developing institutions such as universities, science councils,
supporting them, developing scientists and so on. We are spending billions
and billions of rands a year in keeping them alive and supporting their
work, but we have not been very good at harvesting the results of their
labour. So, with this potential, we will be able to harvest this. It’s a
new territory for all of us and we hope that we will continue to get the
support of hon members, particularly the portfolio committee chaired by the
hon Oliphant, in getting the agency off the ground and nurturing it as a
mother, into what it ought to be. Thank you very much for your support.

Debate concluded.
Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 16:22.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces  to  National  Assembly  in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly:


      1) Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by  National  Council
         of Provinces on 5 March 2008 and transmitted for consideration  of
         Council’s proposed amendments:


         (a)      Correctional  Services  Amendment  Bill  [B  32B  –  2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)  (for  proposed  amendments,  see
             Announcements, Tablings and  Committee  Reports,  19  February
             2008, p 236).


             The Bill has  been  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Correctional Services of the National Assembly for a report  on
             the amendments proposed by the Council.
2.    Membership of Committees


    1.     Minerals and Energy


         (a)      Mr E N N Ngcobo has been elected  as  Chairperson  of  the
             Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy with effect from 13
             February 2008.

3.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Safety and Security:


         (a)      Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
             January 2007 to June 2007, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the
             Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).




    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Health and the Portfolio Committee on Labour for consideration  and
        report. The Report  of  the  Auditor-General  is  referred  to  the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


        (a)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Compensation
             Commissioner for Occupational Diseases  (CCOD)  for  2005-2006
             and 2006-2007, including the Reports of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 and 2006-2007.

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report:
        (a)       Agreement  establishing  the  Africa  Institute  for  the
             Environmentally  Sound  Management  of  Hazardous  and   Other
             Wastes, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
             1996.




        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement  establishing  the
             Africa Institute for the Environmentally Sound  Management  of
             Hazardous and Other Wastes.


    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Finance for consideration:

        (a)      The Budget and Strategic Plan of the  Auditor-General  for
             2008-2011 [RP 231-2007].


    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Trade and Industry and  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Defence  for
        consideration  and  report,  the  committees  to  confer  and   the
        Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry to report:

          a) Report of the South African Council for the  Non-Proliferation
             of Weapons of Mass Destruction for July 2006 to June 2007.


    6.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Home Affairs for  consideration  and  report.  The  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the   Independent
             Electoral Commission (IEC) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and
             Performance Information for 2006-2007 [RP 103-2007].



    7.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance:



        (a)      General Notice No 1634 published in Government Gazette  No
             30464 dated 13 November 2007: Draft Municipal  Asset  Transfer
             Regulations:  Call  for  comments,  in  term  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act  No  1
             of 1999).




        (b)       Government  Notice  No  R.1026  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30420 dated 26  October  2007:  Correction  notice:
             Amendment of Schedule No 1  (No  1/1/1346)  in  terms  of  the
             Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).




        (c)       Government  Notice  No  R.1071  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30460 dated 16 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/302) in terms of the Customs and Excise  Act,  1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).



    8.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Education and the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Education, dated  22  November
             2007, to the Speaker of the National  Assembly,  in  terms  of
             section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance  Management  Act,  1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
             Annual Reports of  the  South  African  Council  of  Educators
             (SACE) and Umalusi for 2006-2007.


    9.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Arts  and  Culture  and  the  Committee  on  Public  Accounts   for
        consideration:


        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Arts  and  Culture,  dated  23
             November 2007, to the Speaker of  the  National  Assembly,  in
             terms of section 65(2)(a) of  the  Public  Finance  Management
             Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),  explaining  the  delay  in  the
             tabling of the Annual Reports of PACOFS,  Luthuli  Museum  and
             the Nelson Mandela Museum for 2006-2007.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      a) Government Notice No 179 published in Government Gazette  No  30779
         dated 15 February 2008: Stopping and  reallocation  of  conditional
         allocations, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2007 (Act  No
         1 of 2007).

2.    The Minister of Public Works

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2008 to 2011.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 28 February 2008 to the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing  Members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  extension  of   the
        employment of the South African National Defence Force in  Burundi,
        for a service in fulfilment of the International Obligations of the
        Republic of South Africa towards the African Union:


        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN BURUNDI, FOR  A  SERVICE  IN  FULFILMENT  OF  THE  INTERNATIONAL
        OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH  AFRICA  TOWARDS  THE  AFRICAN
        UNION


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the extension of employment of the South African  National  Defence
        Force  (SANDF)  personnel  to  Burundi,  in   fulfilment   of   the
        international obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the African Union as part of the African Union Special  Task  Force
        in Burundi. The South African National Defence Force personnel  are
        assisting in providing security to leaders and  combatants  of  the
        Palipehutu-FNL.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 1100  members  were  employed  to  Burundi  as  from  20
        December 2006 to 31 July 2007 to provide security  to  leaders  and
        combatants of the Palipehutu-FNL. The deployment was extended until
        30 March 2008.
        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces, and wish to  request  that  you  bring  the  contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        signed
        TM Mbeki



