---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 19 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2008-06-19
---

THURSDAY, 19 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:02.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                          CALLING OF JOINT SITTING


The Speaker announced that the presiding officers had called a Joint
Sitting of the National Assembly and the NCOP in terms of Joint Rule 7(2)
for the purpose of receiving and debating the Report of the Task Team of
Members of Parliament Probing Violence and Attacks on Foreign Nationals.

  REPORT OF TASK TEAM OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT PROBING VIOLENCE AND ATTACKS
                            ON FOREIGN NATIONALS
                                  (Debate)

Mr K O BAPELA: Thank you, Speaker. The recent violence that erupted and the
attacks on foreign nationals in certain communities in our country shamed
us as a country and had a negative impact internationally. The very few
people who perpetrated the violent attacks created havoc and trauma, and
left a bad mark on the history of our country. However, we were consoled by
the fact that millions of South Africans of goodwill rejected and denounced
the violence and the attacks on foreign nationals.

In the debate that took place in Parliament in the week of the eruption of
violence, all political parties condemned and denounced the attacks, which
was followed by a resolution that led to the establishment of the task team
and its being sent to affected areas to see and listen to the people who
had witnessed that — from the victims themselves, community leaders and the
security agencies in those particular areas.

As I present the report on the probes on behalf of Parliament’s task team,
I would like to take this opportunity to remind South Africans of the
vision of our founding fathers of democracy such as Enoch Sontonga, the
writer of Nkosi sikelel’ iAfrika, which forms part of our National Anthem
today. We sing it with pride, as it evokes emotions of solidarity with
Africa. It refers to Africa, and that includes South Africa, which is an
integral part thereof. This is the vision of the South African patriot who
composed the song; his dream was of a united and free South Africa.
It is also to remind our people that the ruling party is the African
National Congress. As the name says, it embraces a similar vision of
Africa, with South Africa as an integral part thereof. Other parties that
have names that include the word “African” are the Pan African Congress,
the African Christian Democratic Party and the newly-formed African
People’s Convention.

As we report on our probing into the recent violence, one of the key
recommendations is to initiate and embark as South Africans on a campaign
to be called “We are all Africans”. This campaign will be aimed at
educating, having awareness programmes, and teaching our children about our
history as a country, our values and principles, the cultural links to
Africa and the economic ties, which span centuries, with Africa and the
rest of the world.

Lastly, as I present the report, I wish to call on South Africans to see
the positives in the migration towards economic growth and trade, and to
see how some places which were in decline have been revived. Like in any
society, there will always be some that become mischievous or misbehave,
and the law processes will take care of such. Cities in both the USA and
the rest of the world have been shaped by the migration of people, and
continue to grow in that direction.

Parliament has established this task team to get a sense of the gravity of
the situation in regard to the reported incidents of violence and the
attacks on foreign nationals and others. Secondly, it is to interact with
the victims of the violent acts and the relevant communities and
authorities, and to present a report on the visit that can form the basis
of how Parliament will want to intervene in the matter. Lastly, we want to
lay a basis for ongoing work by the parliamentary committees in this
matter.

We visited areas such as Alexandra, Tembisa, Germiston, Reiger Park and
Ramaphosaville. In those areas the people spoke and characterized the
situation and the attacks. When you go and look at the report, you will see
that there is a section where it characterizes the issue of the IFP.  I
think it was at a meeting of the Chief Whips Forum yesterday, which met and
considered the matter, where one of the ANC Youth League members made a
strong contention that the IFP was at the root of the violence. It is there
in the report.

We have now agreed that since that statement was made, the IFP Youth
Brigade and the ANC Youth League have met at the national level and
distanced themselves from it and denounced such utterances and statements.
We embrace the report with that understanding and acknowledge the two
parties’ distancing themselves from it and rebuking the making of the
statement.

If you look at the report, you will see that we as a delegation also said
to the meeting that no conclusion should be arrived at. If there was any
suspicion of any person or party or organisation, it should be reported to
the police. Secondly, the ANC and the IFP committed themselves in that
meeting in Alexandra to work together, which they have been doing, to deal
with any elements within them who are found to have been involved in the
violent attacks.

Tomorrow, when South Africa will be celebrating Refugees Day, the ANC and
IFP leaders from Alexandra will be here in Parliament to give their view of
what happened so that they can further elaborate on the matter. The report
should be read within that particular context.

We report here that most of the attacks and violence took place in the poor
areas, informal settlements and hostels, where there is a lack of
development and service delivery, and where the poorest of our people
reside.

Regarding the geographical aspect of the violence, it only happened in
corners of particular communities, and entire communities were not
engulfed, though they were gripped by violence. We found that the few
people who perpetrated this violence had only affected some, though the
impact was very great, because we saw graphic pictures of people being
burned; we saw the looting, the burning and the destruction of property;
and we are sitting with a situation where we have over 32 000 people who
have been displaced as a result of the violence. The impact has been quite
serious.
We also got reports that there were certain organisations who distributed
pamphlets or used a loud hailer before the attacks. In Ekhurhuleni we also
got a report that there were people moving from one place to the other in
Kombis or taxis, provoking the violence. As a result we found ourselves in
that situation.

We found the following to be the causes of the violence. The first one is
xenophobia. Though the issue should not be exaggerated, at the same time it
should not be underplayed. The issue of xenophobic attitudes does exist
among some South African citizens who will have been exploited to initiate
the violence and attacks on foreign nationals.

It is also because of the migration aspect in a globalised world, where we
see a lot of movement of people in the cities of Europe, in the cities of
the USA and also in South Africa and other African countries, it is mostly
South Africa and Botswana within SADC who are receiving migrants coming to
them. The figures that have been put forward are that before the apartheid
era 500 000 foreign nationals used to live in South Africa, and today it is
estimated to be about 6 million. Let us look at those figures in a very
positive light. As I indicated earlier, they are contributing positively to
our economy, except for a few of them who might be mischievous.
The criminal element took advantage of the situation. Looting, armed
robbery, housebreaking, theft and violent crimes and attacks have been
indicated by the number of people arrested and charged. As soon as the
cases are heard in the courts, those are the situations that will be
explained.

We saw the involvement of the youth and particularly young people between
the ages of 16 and 22. If you look at this issue, you will note that they
were children of up to 3 years old in 1994. There is a lot that we need to
learn from this. Most of them don’t know African values and beliefs and we
therefore need to deal with that issue.

The socioeconomic aspects were also pointed out, such as the competition
for scarce resources, social and economic inequalities in society, poor
living conditions and a high rate of unemployment. These have all indeed
exacerbated an already tense situation. In some instances people raised the
concern of the undocumented migrants who, when they were pursued to the
full extent of the law, were not to be found. South Africans who are law-
abiding and documented will be arrested if they break the law. That is an
issue that calls for some kind of discussion.

The fourth issue was the involvement of a third force and whether there was
such a force or not. Although the delegation did raise the matter, no
evidence came forth. It is safe to say that a measure of planning and
orchestration in the attacks was pointed out in Alexandra and also in
Ekurhuleni, where people moved from one place to another provoking
violence. We have agreed as a task team that the police should follow those
matters up and find out whether it was indeed in pursuance of a particular
agenda, or a political agenda of some sort.

The fifth one is the knowledge and awareness that amongst South African
citizens there is a lack of knowledge and awareness, what we can refer to
as ignorance about foreign nationals. They do not know who these people
are. Some are naturalized citizens. Some have refugee status. People are
confused about that. Some have an asylum seeker’s permit. The general trend
is to put them all in one basket and that is it! That ignorance is quite
dangerous and we need to do something about it.

Lastly, there are the existing perceptions in communities, where we found
that as a result of the growth of migrant people who are moving into those
communities, people are saying that these people are taking their jobs,
their women and their houses. These are perceptions, and when you
investigate deeper, you find that these are just rumours and people tend to
believe them rather than looking for facts and following them up. There are
social relations that have broken down, where fights occur from time to
time. This has never been a problem but all of a sudden these issues are
being elevated. As was mentioned earlier, the undocumented migrants remain
a concern.

I am not going into the impact of the violence. I think it was well
reported. Regarding the humanitarian situation, a number of displaced
people were left in crisis, and this is in the report.

We then came to the following proposals or recommendations. The first is
that parliamentary public hearings should be held by a joint session of all
relevant parliamentary committees, where we will begin to assess the
policies and the legislative framework dealing with migration and
immigration, including the magnitude of the problem of undocumented
migrants, the porous borders that we have, and whether the decision or no
decision that was taken that the army should no longer patrol our borders
was correct or not. Our closing in on our borders does not mean we are
saying no one shall come into South Africa. It is really the issue of
safety and security, and the transitional crimes such as women trafficking
that we need to prevent. Whoever comes to South Africa should come through
legal means. Those hearings will assist us in finding a balance and seeing
the challenges and gaps in our policies.

The parliamentary task team, comprising members from the Western Cape and
also Gauteng, should continue to oversee the programme of reintegration of
those people who were displaced into the communities, where it will be
safe, and into other parts of communities where it is safe to do so. Such
reports will come to Parliament continuously. Parliament should recall all
the resolutions contained in the UN World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and see to it that these
are being implemented and how far we have moved as a country in the
implementation.

The long-term recommendation includes the “We are all Africans” campaign.
We also need to look at the violent nature of South Africans. It is quite
worrying that 14 years down the line, South African people can still
respond in the manner in which they did. Something is not well within our
society and we need to look at these issues. We should also begin to engage
in campaigns that are positive, that will rebuild the image of South
Africa, which has been dented, especially now before the 2010 World Cup. We
need to ensure that everyone is on board. We need to begin to root out
corruption within society, particularly in Home Affairs. They need to begin
to ensure that the systems are clean and not corruptible, or those who are
corrupt are then removed.

In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity on behalf of this
institution to thank all the people of South Africa who really helped by
denouncing and condemning violence, and by opening their hearts, their
homes and their purses in assisting. Our thanks also go to the national,
provincial and local governments, community leaders, religious leaders,
NGOs and civil society for their assistance. Some of them are sitting in
the gallery. A big thank you goes to the policemen and women who were there
when the violence broke out and who really ensured that it did not spread
further.
Lastly, I thank the Speaker, the Chairperson of the NCOP, the members of
the task team on these violent attacks, hon members, political parties and
the Chief Whips Forum for their co-operation and support.

The report is presented for consideration. We have attached an annexure
which attempts to give the graphic situation of the history of people’s
movement to South Africa from colonialism up to now. It is quite
educational and helpful. People can thus engage with the issue. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, as a member of the parliamentary task team,
I would like, at the outset, to acknowledge the good work done by the Chair
of the team, hon Obed Bapela. His approach to this task given to us by
Madam Speaker has been laudably inclusive, consultative and thorough. We
have had ample opportunity to observe, discuss and make contributions to
the report, and we have had excellent support from the researchers. But
basically it was a task hedged around with tragedy, as the Chair has said,
and shame.

The events which started on the evening of 11 May in Alexandra Township,
part of my constituency area, and which spread to other areas in Gauteng
and eventually to the Western Cape, bear shocking testimony to the deep-
seated xenophobic tendencies and violence which characterise our society.
Over 60 people have been killed and over 30 000 displaced, but the image of
the kneeling Mozambican man burning to death in the dust in Ramaphosa
squatter camp as a xenophobic mob laughed and hurled insults, shocked the
world as South Africa has not shocked the world since the end of apartheid.
As we say in this report, our image has been dented to say the least.

We as South Africans have a lot of work to do to process what has happened
and to search for the way forward. Hopefully, this report of our
parliamentary task team can make a positive contribution to this search.

Two things are very clear from this report. The first is that government
must shoulder the responsibility for what happened. It is clear that the
state’s failure to stem the tide of illegal immigration, and incapacity to
process the wave of refugee applications, were a short-term catalyst to the
violence in a fertile field of rising food and fuel prices, a shortage of
housing and jobs, and general poverty. The fact is that poverty-stricken
South Africans bear the brunt of government’s policy failures. The Human
Sciences Research Council’s study of the violence, released this week,
confirms this position.

Secondly, while the police, local government and civil society have done a
magnificent job in dealing with the immediate crisis – and on behalf of the
DA, I would like to thank them once again - Parliament itself must play a
key role in providing solutions in the short, medium and long term.

It was appropriate that in compiling the report the team started on the
ground in Alex, talking to the police, the community and the victims of the
violence. The extent of the tragedy was made clear to me when I was told by
women from Zimbabwe and Mozambique, temporarily housed in the conference
room of Alex Police Station, that they had lived in our country for 15 to
17 years and regarded South Africa as their home. Was that not enough time
to escape the label of “foreigner”? Apparently not.

The SA Human Rights Commission, in its comprehensive report published in
2006, found that South Africans are exceedingly xenophobic and the causes
for it are complex. These include South Africa’s racist history, along with
extreme levels of poverty. It is mostly black African foreigners who face
discrimination, hostility and abuse, which lead to intermittent violent
attacks. It is particularly shocking that the SAHRC report found that those
officials tasked with the protection of foreigners, such as the police and
the Department of Home Affairs, displayed the highest levels of xenophobia.

Since 1994, South Africa has engaged with the problem of xenophobia as
indicated in this report. In 1998, there was a consultative conference
which came up with a national programme of action and the Roll Back
Xenophobia Campaign, which has regrettably lately not been resourced and
appears to have fallen into disuse. It urgently needs to be resuscitated.

In 2001, the issue of xenophobia was one of the key areas under discussion
at the UN Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance held in Durban, and South Africa did subscribe to the
declaration emanating from that conference recognising, among other things,
the key role of parliaments in fighting xenophobia.

In 2004, the SAHRC and Parliament’s Foreign Affairs Portfolio Committee
held hearings, which eventually led to the 2006 report I mentioned earlier.


The impressions gained at Alex are summed up in the report, with
overwhelming evidence from all parties that the xenophobic violence was
orchestrated, and that it started in the Beirut section of Alex, dominated
by hostel dwellers. By contrast, in other areas we visited, Tembisa,
Germiston, Reiger Park and Ramaphosa, although outsiders are alleged to
have visited these areas before the violence started, these attacks were
more in the nature of copycat attacks, coupled with opportunistic criminal
incidents.

A common denominator of the attacks is that they all occurred in areas
where people are really poor, competing for meagre resources and services,
resentful at competition for what little was offered by government.
Grievances relating to occupation by foreigners of government supplied
housing was typical of complaints that were made. The Ramaphosa settlement,
visited by the task team at dusk when thick smoke from fires partially
obscured our vision, is about as poor as it gets in urban areas. We were
told by the police that within 24 hours of chasing out the foreigners, the
local residents had cleared their shacks, which they had burnt down, and
were building their own shacks on that reclaimed turf.

This raises the burning question which has still not been answered: How do
we reintegrate the foreign nationals washed up in the camps back into these
sorts of places they used to call home if they do not wish to return to
their own countries and indeed have the right to remain in ours? Is it
possible and, if so, will we not risk more violence? The new HSRC’s report
confirms that it will not be easy to do so and it will require very strong
leadership. The task team report suggests that this leadership should be
provided by Parliament, because xenophobia cannot be tolerated.

This report makes a number of recommendations. Some of those have been
dealt with by the hon Bapela, including the following. In the short term,
as he has indicated, the relevant parliamentary committees must get
together to review the entire policy and legislative framework dealing with
immigration and assess how many people are here who are undocumented
immigrants and what the magnitude of that problem is. The Members of
Parliament in both affected areas, mainly Gauteng and the Western Cape,
should remain as monitoring task teams to monitor the implementation of
humanitarian and reintegration programmes.

In the longer term, Parliament must ensure that the corruption in the
Department of Home Affairs is rooted out and urgent steps are taken to
process refugees and immigrants, and to issue them with the correct
documentation. We must also monitor the interministerial task team looking
into the causes of the attacks. As a matter of urgency, parliamentary
committees within the security cluster should review the securing of South
Africa’s borders and ports of entry. Together with civil society and
government departments, Parliament must promote a national campaign against
violence, and at the same time establish the ability of the SA Police
Service’s crime combating units to stem future attacks and respond to
violent situations in general. We must resuscitate the Roll Back Xenophobia
Campaign and focus on our commitments as a country to observing foreigners’
rights. We must help to enhance South Africa’s image ahead of the Fifa
World Cup in two years’ time; we must enhance that image, and we must work
towards that goal. We must examine to what extent the Millennium
Development Goals have been attained. We must monitor progress in
processing cases arising from the xenophobic attacks in special courts
established for this purpose. And there are further goals for the longer
term which are listed in the report.

The DA supports all these actions. Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Madam Speaker, Chairperson of the NCOP, Ministers present
and hon members, the IFP commends the chairperson of this task team, hon O
Bapela, for his able leadership of the team, as well as the entire
membership of the all-party team for their commitment and diligence. The
IFP also feels that the recommendations of the task team are ideally
positive, not only in highlighting the social, economic and political
origins of the conflict and violence, but also the recommendations
suggesting the way forward.

The IFP sympathises with all those affected by the senseless violence and
commends South African civil society, the government and the general public
for their humanitarian aid offered to those affected. We deeply regret the
loss of lives and offer our deepest condolences to those affected.

We must be tough on xenophobia and criminality, and, yes, we must be
equally tough on the causes of xenophobia. South Africans are neither
xenophobic nor mean-spirited. South African people are hospitable and
generous, even when they have little or nothing to share. They have long
embraced the spirit of ubuntu botho, which says: “Umuntu ngumuntu
ngabanthu.” [“A person is a person through other people.”]

Their misfortune is that of having a less than fully competent government
which has made enormous mistakes and has stood by them with steadfast
stubbornness, especially in the field of migration control, service
delivery, poverty and the fight against crime. A lack of service delivery
and fighting crime, poverty, and a lack of proper immigration control
resulted in the emergence of another phobia, which burst out at Polokwane
in December 2007.

On 16 May 2008 the IFP in this House denounced the xenophobic attacks and
placed on record that it believed that the failure of government to deliver
services to the people of Alexandra was the cause of the current crisis in
that area. It also rejected the notion that it was the IFP that had caused
the violence in Alexandra. The IFP called upon both the Department of
Foreign Affairs and the Department of Home Affairs to champion a tangible
programme to deal with xenophobia, which is in line with the
recommendations of the task team.

This is a true reflection of how the IFP views the matter at hand, but an
irresponsible, callous and not surprising statement from the ANC Youth
League in Alexandra, which accused the IFP of being responsible for the
attacks, appears in the report. I am pleased, Mr Bapela, with the way you
have handled the issue. However, as you have correctly stated, at a meeting
of the youth formations convened by the ANC Youth League at Luthuli House,
the IFP Youth Brigade raised the issue of the ANC Youth League in Alexandra
and the ANC Youth League distanced itself from such irresponsible
statements. It cleared the position of the Youth League and a youth front
against xenophobia was formed, which comprises all youth formations, with a
slogan: “South Africa, we are listening. Africa, we are sorry.” We
therefore wish to put it on record that the IFP has serious reservations
about this report, which gives the wrong impression to the reader, that the
IFP is the root cause of the attack.

One is aware that more especially the ruling party is divided on how to
deal with the xenophobic attacks. The one side, like all South Africans and
independent institutions and researchers, agrees that the root cause of
these unfortunate incidents is a lack of service delivery, poverty, poor or
no immigrant control, and the fight against crime. The other side is
worried about its legacy, which has been exposed by these attacks, showing
that they were stubbornly against accepting their failures in service
delivery, fighting crime and immigration control.

The time has come for South Africans to desist from the syndrome of
denials, scapegoating and spin doctoring the facts. We are all in this —
let us work together to deal with these xenophobic tendencies and
criminality. There is no amount of economic and social hardship which can
justify this barbaric behaviour. Visiting Alexandra, Tembisa and the
offices of the Ekurhuleni Municipality and driving through the Ramaphosa
squatter camp has not given us a full picture of what happened. There is a
lot that needs to be done to effectively bring about the necessary healing
and reconciliation. I thank you. [Applause.]

Nksz S N SIGCAU: Somlomo ohloniphekileyo, baPhathiswa bembeko namalungu
ahloniphekileyo, xa ndixabangela malunga nalo mba, ndingathi iqela lale
Ndlu, elibandakanya onke amaqela ezopolitiko amelweyo kule Ndlu, lifumanise
oku kulandelayo ngokubhekisele kumba wokutshutshiswa kwabantu bangaphandle.


Okokuqala, iingingqi ezibandakanyekayo kolu dushe zingingqana ezincinci
ezibandakanya abantu bangaphandle kunye negcuntswana labantu balapha
eMzantsi Afrika. Okwesibini, olu dushe lube neziphumo ezikhulu,
zokukhutshwa kwabantu ezindlwini zabo; ukubethwa kwabantu ngohlobo
oluhambisa umzimba, maxa wambi batshiselwe naloo mizi yabo; ukubulawa
kwabantu okanye ukutshiswa kwabo ngomlilo bephila.

Lo bholokodlela ushiye umzi ontsundu wahlulalene phakathi. Kukho
abalugxekayo olu hlaselo, ngeli lixa abanye bentyontya amakhwelo, kuxhelwe
exhukwana kubo. Into eqaqambileyo kulo bholokodlela yeyokuba uxhaphake
kwezi ndawo kuhlutshekiweyo kuzo, ematyotyombeni.

Olu hlaselo luqubulisile, khange lubonakale luseza; nto leyo ethetha ukuba
khange luqulunqwe kwantlandlolo, koko yinto esuke yathi gqi qhaphu.
Nakaloku nje, alikabikho eliqinileyo elivela kurhulumente elithi uza
kuyithini na le ntlekele, le ngxubakaxaka.

Simana sisiva nje ukuba aba bantu uza kubabuyisela eluntwini. Esingayivayo
kakuhle into yeyokuba uza kubabuyisela njani. Into encomekayo kuyo yonke le
nto kukuphakama kwabantu ngamxhelo-mnye belugxeka olu hlaselo; ne-UDM
yazibandakanya nesi simbonono kwaye isazibandakanya naso nakaloku nje.

Ngokukokwam ukubona, asikabikho isizathu sokuba abantu abanenyama negazi
njengam nawe baphatheke kabuhlungu kangaka, ngakumbi oomama, abantwana,
amaxhego namaxhegokazi.

Xa ndigqibezela, urhulumente makakhawulezise ukuphanda ukuba le ntlekele
isuswe yintoni na. Urhulumente wethu makakhawulezise ukubatshutshisa abantu
abafumaneke bechaphezeleka kolu dushe, ze kwenziwe isifundo ngabo ukuze
nabanye bangaze banqwenele ukwenza into eyelele kule.

Urhulumente wethu makabe neenkqubo zokufundisa abantu ngobuzwe baseAfrika,
ngobuntu jikelele, nangokuhlonipha abasemzini, ze ongeze nangemithetho
engqingqwa ekhusela imida yeli negxile ekukhuseleni abo sele bengaphakathi,
nokuba bangene ngayiphina indlela.

Masimanyane maAfrika! Imvelaphi nekamva lethu linye; sidityaniswe
ngumqokozo ongenakuqhawuka. Masele ndiphela apho, Somlomo. Enkosi.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms S N SIGCAU: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and hon members, concerning
the issue under discussion, namely xenophobia, let me say  that a task team
consisting of all political parties represented in this august House came
to the following conclusions.

First of all, the xenophobic attacks took place in pockets of areas where
foreign nationals and a few South Africans reside. Secondly, these attacks
have had profound results, such as people being chased out of their houses;
others being brutally attacked and having their houses burnt down; and the
killing of people by burning them alive.

This tragedy has left South Africans divided. There are those who criticise
these attacks, whilst others are having a field day instigating them. What
is clear is that these xenophobic attacks are common in informal
settlements.

These attacks took us by surprise and they happened spontaneously. Even
now, there is no word from government as to how government plans to deal
with this matter.

We hear that the displaced people will be reintegrated into the communities
they came from, but we do not know how government plans to do that. At
least one good aspect out of this was the fact that the people, including
the UDM, unanimously condemned these attacks.

In my opinion, there is no reason that people with flesh and blood just
like you and me, particularly women, children and the elderly, should be
treated in such a terrible manner.

In conclusion, government should take steps, without delay, to investigate
the reasons behind these attacks and make an example of the perpetrators by
prosecuting them.

Government should create programmes to educate people about African
nationalism, ubuntu in general and respect for foreign nationals.
Government should also come up with strict border controls to protect those
who are already inside our borders, regardless of how they came to be here.

Let us all unite as Africans! Our past and our future are one and are
irrevocably linked. Let me end there, Madam Speaker. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr M H HOOSEN: Madam Speaker, many debates and discussions have been held
in this House and on platforms throughout our country on the causes of and
matters pertaining to the recent shocking xenophobic attacks. As the free
movement of people for better living conditions becomes more and more
apparent, xenophobia has become a growing international phenomenon, with
many countries experiencing similar problems. What has elevated the South
African situation is the high level of violence associated with these
attacks.

Madam Speaker, without exploring the causes in detail, which are several
and have been well documented, let me say that as responsible leaders we
need to urgently look ahead. We must ask ourselves: Why are our actions
becoming increasinly reactive, rather than proactive? What can we as a
nation do to be better prepared in the future? What preventative measures
can we adopt to ensure that this does not happen, on such a scale, in the
future?

Indeed education must form the backbone of our aim to eradicate xenophobia
from our nation. As a signatory to the Durban Declaration, the product of
the conference on xenophobia a few years ago, South Africa has a
responsibility to proactively adopt preventative measures and we must
accept that we have not pursued this with the vigour that it deserves.

At this point, I would like to congratulate hon Bapela for the good work
that he has done, but at the same time also suggest that this ugly word,
makwerekwere [foreigners], in our communities must be banned from the
vocabulary of our people.

The regularisation of asylum seekers and proper documenting of migrants
also need urgent attention. Against the backdrop of these urgent measures,
the ID supports the recommendations that this committee continues the good
work that has been done and be further tasked with oversight over the
implementation of the recommendations produced.

In particular, the second recommendation on developing educational
programmes around the principle of “We are all African” must be given
priority and urgently implemented. Parallel to this, a programme to reduce
the high levels of violence in our societies must also be implemented. I
thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Somlomo, malungu onke abekekileyo ...
[Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Speaker, hon members
...]

... last month our country witnessed a wave of xenophobic attacks and
violence that spread to various parts of our country. Xenophobia is based
on unfounded, unverified fears, as well as the inclination to stereotype
foreigners as the cause of social and economic problems.

Generally, xenophobic attitudes are a reflection of a change in migration
streams and the perceived threat to citizens’ rights and interests. It is
one of the most inhumane forms of discrimination facing many migrants in
many parts of the world.

Somlomo obekekileyo, thina bantu baseMzantsi Afrika siqhele ukuhlala
nabantu bamanye amazwe, kwaye sihleli nabo iminyaka ngeminyaka. Asifuni ke
ngoko ukudibanisa ukubukulwa kwezinye izizwe nobundlavini esibubone
buqhubeka. Kwaye iyothusa into yokuba abo babengamaxhoba ocalu-calulo ibe
ngabo abaphambili ekundlandlathekiseni abantu ababhacele apha ngenxa
yeemeko kumazwe abo.

Ndiyaphinda ndithi, umbutho wethu norhulumente wethu ... (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Speaker, as South Africans, we are used to living side-by-side with
foreigners, and we have been living with them for many years. Therefore, we
do not want to associate ourselves with the violent xenophobia attacks we
witnessed recently. It is alarming that the very people who were victims of
apartheid are alleged to be the ones perpetrating these attacks on foreign
nationals who fled to this country owing to terrible conditions in their
own countries.

I repeat this again, our political party and our government ...]

... condemn in the strongest possible terms this inhumane front of
criminality and blatant exploitation of challenges faced by our people.

Ndazi nto nye ke, Somlomo, ukuba thina sendiselene naba bantu, kwaye
siyazalana. Kufuneka ke sizame ukuba zingohlulwa iintsapho ngenxa yemikhwa
yoofunzeweni abangenazinjongo zakuncedisana norhulumente ekuphuculeni
nasekuziseni iinkonzo ebantwini. Kwakhona, uMzantsi Afrika awusosiqithi
eAfrika; uyinxenye yeAfrika.

Njengabameli babantu, ngumsebenzi wethu ukuba sithi rhoqo sixoxisane
nabantu bakuthi, silwe naluphi na uhlobo localu-calulo lwabantu
abangaphakathi eMzantsi Afrika. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[One thing I know, Madam Speaker, is that we have intermarried with these
people, and therefore we are related. We must avoid a situation where
families are separated on account of wrongdoings by rogue elements who have
other motives than to assist government improve service delivery to the
people. Furthermore, South Africa is not an island in Africa; it is part of
Africa.

As representatives of the people, it is our duty often to hold debates with
our people and fight any form of discrimination against people in South
Africa.]

As a caring organisation, the ANC deployed its leadership to all the
centres and areas where people were housed. We made sure that we addressed
people, showed that we care, and many of our members are continuing with
that work as we speak.

We must indicate that many foreign nationals still regard South Africa as
their beacon of hope and a home away from home. As the ANC, we would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate that we will continue to use all
means to quell any form of discrimination against foreign nationals. We
will continue to seek solutions and work with those affected to redress the
impact of these violent attacks.

We would also like to express our deepest appreciation for the heartening
support to victims of thuggery and hooliganism, and the overwhelming
positive response of many South Africans, including students, churches,
nongovernmental organisations, the private sector, media houses, artists,
national and provincial governments, municipalities and even local
communities.

We would like to take this opportunity to congratulate institutions,
organisations and individuals for showing the real spirit of ubuntu and
African unity by providing humanitarian support, including shelter and
physical support, to assist those who were relocating, and food for those
who were placed in temporary shelter.

Ndifun’ukuthi, ilungu elibekekileyo uNkskz Camerer, njengomntu owayekhe
wakurhulumente owawuphethe ngaphambili, uyawazi umahluko phakathi kwalo
rhulumente wethu norhulumente owayekho awayinxalenye yawo. Wazi kakuhle
ukuba akukho nto basenzela yona thina; sazilwela. Lo rhulumente uzama
ukulungiselela abo babengaxhamli.
Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: [Engavakali.]

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA LAMAPHONDO LESIZWE: Ndiyothuka kuba nalo
uthethayo uthetha kanye le nto bendiyithetha. Benza kanye le nto
bendiyixela; balibele kukujonga kurhulumente. Urhulumente akazi kukhuthaza
ubundlavini. Khange kubekho lubukulo lwabantu ngokobuzwe; bubundlavini qha
obu benzekileyo. Yaye asisoze sibukhuthaze ubundlavini, nokuba benziwa
ngubani na. Yiyo loo nto sisithi iyasothusa into yokuba ibe ngabantu
ababengaxhamli abakhokelayo kobu bundlavini.

Mandize kweli lungu belisandul’ ukusuka apha. Iyinene yona into yokuba
ngulo rhulumente oncede ekubeni kuphele amaholo apha eMzantsi Afrika.
Ukubangaba i-ANC ibingaphethanga, ngekusekho ooNdokwenza nanamhlanje apha
eMzantsi Afrika. Ngenxa yemithetho ekhoyo kuMzantsi Afrika omtsha, abantu
bahlala kwiindawo abathanda ukuhlala kuzo, apho baziva bengonwaba khona.

Mandigqibele ngelithi, thina siyi-ANC siya kuncedisana norhulumente ukuze
abantu abangabophuli-mthetho bafakwe kwindawo ebafaneleyo. Ngaphezu koko,
asisoze siyikhuthaze into yokuba, kuba abantu namhlanje besazi ukuba
sijongene nonyulo, bazenze ngathi bayasebenza ukulungiselela ukuba
banyulwe. Awukho omnye umbutho osebenzileyo apha eMzantsi Afrika ngaphandle
kwe-ANC. Kwaye awukho omnye umbutho oseza kusebenzela abantu, okwangoku
sisaphilayo sisonke, ngaphandle kwe-ANC. Enkosi, Somlomo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I want to say to hon member Camerer, as a person who was part of the
previous government, that she knows the difference between our government
and the government she served in. She knows very well that they did nothing
for us, as we fought for everything we have. This government is trying to
help those who were previously disadvantaged.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: [Inaudible.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: I am surprised because even this hon member
who is heckling me, is saying exactly what I was saying. They are doing
exactly what I said; they are blaming the government. Government does not
encourage violent behaviour. What we just witnessed was not xenophobia; it
was plain violence. And we do not encourage violence regardless of who
perpetrates it. That is why we say it is surprising to notice that the
people who are alleged to be at the forefront of these violent attacks are
people who were previously disadvantaged.

Let me respond to the previous speaker. Indeed it is true that it is this
government that took the decision to abolish migrant workers’ hostels in
South Africa. If it wasn’t for the ANC government, even today we would
still have migrant workers’ hostels in South Africa. Because of the new
laws in South Africa, people are free to stay where they want to stay;
where they feel happy.

Let me conclude by saying that we, as the ANC, will work hand in hand with
government so that criminals are put in prison where they belong.
Furthermore, we can see through the actions of people who, now that we have
elections coming up, pretend to have the interests of the electorate at
heart. No other party, other than the ANC, has worked hard in South Africa.
And no other political party in our lifetime, other than the ANC, will work
for the advancement of the interests of the people. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. [Applause.]]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP offers sincere apologies to the 32
000 people, mainly foreign nationals, who have been displaced and
accommodated in tents, community halls and churches across the country, and
expresses deep regret and concern for all who have experienced the
consequences of the shocking actions of a few.

The ACDP salutes all those who worked and gave so generously and
selflessly, and in fact are still accommodating foreign nationals. The
manner in which the SA Police Service responded also needs to be commended.

The ACDP appreciates Parliament’s urgent attention to the calls of Members
of Parliament for us to respond adequately to this crisis. We also
recognise the work of MPs, officials and staff, and commend them for this
effort. Having participated in the efforts of the task team, the ACDP
supports the resulting report and its recommendations.

All manner of conspiracy theories arose to explain the xenophobia. It was
said to be too organised to be spontaneous, yet, having visited four
different, high-density areas in turmoil, I’m not sure it was particularly
organised. Many side agendas, it seems, also took advantage of the
situation, escalating and distorting it.

The sudden outpouring of violence against foreigners shocked us as a
nation, despite the fact that we knew that xenophobic attitudes were rife
and many reports on this have been available. One of our major blind spots,
I believe, is that South Africans somehow see themselves as naturally good
people. Well, we are only as good as we choose to be and in reality every
one of us is capable of shocking behaviour. It would be helpful for us to
remember this, and not just to assume that we are somehow going to do the
right thing. We have to be alert and to work on our attitudes and actions
at all times. We will exhibit base, selfish, survival instincts.

We also make the mistake of assuming that people who have experienced pain
and suffering will be compassionate, but so often the opposite is true, as
wounded people tend to wound others. And people who have suffered rejection
reject. This vicious cycle can only be broken when people choose to
forgive, choose not to take offence, and choose to pass on only what is
good.

The number of foreign migrants to South Africa has increased from 500 000
in the 1990s to around 6 million at present. This reality is a major part
of our lives and government must ensure that adequate measures are in place
so that unnecessary pressure is not placed on people as migrants integrate
into society. There should be easy access to conflict resolution processes,
for example, as people living in close proximity and sharing inadequate
resources are bound to experience times of conflict.

The ACDP recognises the economic value migrants bring to this country,
besides the wonderful diversity, and this should be encouraged and
supported.

Bitter complaints heard by the delegation range from, “they take our jobs”
to “they take our women”. And the fact that foreign nationals had
businesses caused particular irritation. One person told me how unfair it
was that people from Mozambique were being financed by Graça Machel Mandela
– irrational, maybe, but tragically heartfelt.

Skills development, mentorship programmes and entrepreneurial opportunities
are desperately needed, but ultimately people who succeed will always be
those who put in the effort, and not those who wait for everything to be
done for them.
“South Africa, we are listening! Africa, we are sorry!”

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, the hon Bapela says the ANC has “Africa” in
its name and that is correct. Afrikaners named themselves after Africa and
that is also correct. [Laughter.]

The xenophobia attacks have radically changed South Africa. Photos of
foreigners being burnt has shattered the dream of a South Africa showing
the world how people should live in harmony with each other. Who would, a
year ago, have predicted that South African embassies in Africa and the
Bafana Bafana soccer team would need extra security, and that on our own
continent?

The government says it was caught by surprise, but the government was
warned timeously. In the African Peer Review Report government was
seriously warned more than a year ago about xenophobia and racism in South
Africa. Paragraph 956 says xenophobia against other Africans is currently
on the rise and should be nipped in the bud.

To accommodate a few thousand ANC exiles in Africa during the struggle
years is something totally different from allowing 6 million foreigners to
compete with poor South Africans for scarce resources and thinking that it
will not create conflict. I don’t think we can make that comparison that
easily.

The HSRC found that people are angered by foreigners, as “(t)hey believe
migrants are putting strain on already limited resources”.

We need improved border control, a new national migration policy, and a
programme to deal with corruption at Home Affairs and municipalities, and
in the police. Frustration over the pace of service delivery in general and
housing in particular must also be addressed.

Hierdie probleem is veroorsaak deur die korttermynoplossings van die
regering. Moenie dat ons nou weer dieselfde foute maak nie. Die huidige ANC-
oplossing om deur middel van opvoeding vir Suid-Afrikaners te leer hoe om
vreemdelinge te hanteer en om die vreemdelinge in die gemeenskap te
herïntegreer, is uiters belangrik, maar dit is net deel van die oplossing.
Dit is nie die hele oplossing nie. As dit die regering se oplossing vir die
probleem is, voorspel ek dat ons oor ‘n tydperk, en dalk kort voor 2010,
weer uitbarstings kan kry, as ons die probleem net oppervlakkig gaan
aanspreek.

Mevrou, probeer gerus om onwettig, byvoorbeeld in Botswana, in te kom en
kyk of jy daar kan werk kry. Botswana het, soos alle ander Afrikalande,
streng reëls oor wie toegelaat word en wanneer jy toegelaat word. Die
onderliggende rede hiervoor is om jou eie burgers teen oorstroming en
onnodige kompetisie te beskerm. Dis net logies. Ons kan dit nie ignoreer
nie.
Beter grenskontrole, beter dienslewering en beter behuising is deel van
hierdie oplossing. Anders het ons weer moeilikheid. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This problem was caused by the government’s short-term solutions. Let us
not make the same mistakes now. The current ANC solution to educate South
Africans on how to deal with foreigners and to reintegrate foreigners into
the community is extremely important, but it is only part of the solution.
It is not the whole solution. If this is the government’s solution to the
problem, I predict that over a period, maybe even shortly before 2010,
there could be outbreaks again, if we were to address the problem only
superficially.

Madam, you are welcome to try and gain illegal entry into Botswana for
example, and see whether you can get a job there. Like all other African
countries, Botswana has strict regulations about who is to be allowed
entry, and when you will be allowed such entry. The underlying reason for
this is to protect your own citizens against unnecessary competition and
from being swamped. It is only logical. We cannot ignore it.

Better border control, better service delivery and better housing are part
of this solution; otherwise there will be trouble again. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Speaker, our lovely country has been thrown into a
morass of shame by some people who rose against foreign nationals last
month.

They are selfish, insecure people who say the foreign nationals have taken
their wives, their jobs and their money. Saying this indicates their
weaknesses. One wonders how easily such women could have been taken away.
They ignore the fact that they don’t want to work, while these foreign
nationals have ways and means of fending for themselves and making money.

The UCDP believes that mankind, regardless of stature, status, educational
background, gender or nationality has loved, respected, served, consulted
and tolerated. To a degree we agree with the motto of the AME Church. They
say, “Man, our brother”, indicating that every person is our brother or
sister. We challenge the perpetrators of these atrocious acts to desist and
never, ever engage in them again and shame us as a nation.

All law-abiding citizens have by now acknowledged and condemned violence in
South Africa and have furthermore expressed different views on the causes
of the violence. Whatever ostensible reasons may be advanced, we South
Africans have to agree unanimously that we must find one another and trace
our follies where we have gone wrong, confess our iniquities and
transgressions, and ask for forgiveness, for He is a loving God. He will
heal our land. I thank you.

Mr E RASOOL (Premier of the Western Cape): Speaker, Chairperson of the
NCOP, members, I am quite aware that I am making my debut in this House, so
it’s not for me to enter into any contentious debate with any speakers
before me.

I thought that I should much rather help to add to the report of the hon
Obed Bapela by providing a synopsis of an anatomy of what happened in the
Western Cape on 22 May, 2008, starting off in Knysna and spreading to Du
Noon and later that night to Masiphumelele, where attacks against foreign
nationals occurred. The next day these incidents and attacks continued to
Lwandle and to Khayelitsha.

Out of those direct attacks 5 000 people were displaced, but about 14 000
other foreign nationals were displaced on the basis of a fear of attacks
that had taken place. We need to understand that 19 000 people were
displaced, of whom about 5 000 were placed under direct violent threat by
gangs of looters and people driven by other motivations. At its height in
the Western Cape 19 000 people were displaced, 6 people died and 20 people
suffered injuries, including one of the worst, a policeman who is in ICU
because of having been attacked by someone who threw a brick at his head.

Having seen what had happened in Gauteng, we know we have been fairly
fortunate in the Western Cape. We were able to place the province on alert.
A safety forum was established by the Provincial Commissioner of Police,
relief NGOs were put on alert, and because a conference on xenophobia had
been convened in that week, ahead of these attacks, we could intervene
immediately and minimise the loss of life, injuries and fatalities. We
could also mobilise relief in the way that it has been done.

I also want to say more in general appreciation of the police. We saw in
that period that the police were all called off leave, their shifts were
extended from seven hours to twelve hours, they were placed on alert to
move to any part of the province and, together with Bambanani, they were
able to play an admirable role in all of this.

I think we managed all of this despite many agendas and despite challenges
to co-ordination and disagreements about the details of the operation and
what we had to do. We were able to put together a three-pronged strategy in
the Western Cape that was based, firstly, on ensuring safety, secondly, on
mobilising relief and, thirdly, on creating the basis for reintegrating
foreign nationals back into the communities from which they had come.

Some of the conditions in the Western Cape allowed us to be fairly
successful. Within 30 hours the violence in the Western Cape was quelled, a
total of 376 people had been arrested, and even some of the courts heeded
the call not to grant bail to any of the arrested people in order not to
jeopardise any efforts at reintegration.

On humanitarian relief, we had food given by NGOs, but to be honest in a
forum like this, many of the food resources were supplied by government.
Shelter was also given by churches and mosques.

The point of disagreement was simply whether people should be housed within
communities to facilitate reintegration, or should be isolated in mega
camps on beaches. That was a major point of contention.

I am relieved that the issue is being resolved as, finally, there is
overall agreement, including with the city, to disband Soetwater. There is
agreement that it created unintended consequences, it created security
problems and challenges for us, it compromised the dignity particularly of
women in the camps, and it gave the impression of secondary trauma as we
went on from that point. We now have agreement to disband Soetwater, as we
are attempting to move Soetwater’s people to other places. We now need to
make sure that reintegration occurs.

Our interaction with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
indicates very clearly that 95% of foreign nationals, particularly in the
Western Cape, will not be able to go back to their countries of origin, or
any other country of their choice. That means that for the foreseeable
future they are our guests. That furthermore means that they cannot for the
foreseeable future be in refugee camps or mega camps or isolated from
communities.

We have over 200 people working as mediators in order to facilitate it. I
want to say that at the height of these attacks on foreign nationals and
the fear that it engendered, we had 19 000 displaced people. The figure
this morning was more or less 8 250. What that means is that over 10 000
people have successfully been reintegrated into their communities.

This speaks of enormous goodwill and balanced behaviour by South Africans,
and Masiphumelele led the way. [Applause.] Apologising, collecting the
stolen goods by going door-to-door and getting them back, and helping to re-
erect the shops and the houses of foreign nationals: That speaks to the
true spirit of South Africans. For every one person who attacked a foreign
national, there were tens of thousands of other people who poured their
hearts out. That is the silver lining that must not be lost in the dark
cloud of what is South Africa today.

It is also important that we understand that we need to drive a massive
campaign that creates welcoming and safe conditions for people. In that
regard I think that the campaign that the hon Bapela spoke about, “We are
all Africans”, is something that we embrace very heartily, not only for our
xenophobic province, but for our general perceptions in the Western Cape.

I am happy that I’ve had this opportunity to share some of these thoughts
with you, and I look forward to embracing the report by the hon Bapela.
Thank you very much.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The recent spread of xenophobic
attacks throughout the country has been absolutely horrific and barbarous.
This abominable behaviour has shocked many of us and we have questioned
where this has possibly stemmed from. In view of the report, the MF is
pleased that the task team, led by our hon Bapela, has looked into the
situation. For us it has certainly been an eye-opener regarding the type of
South Africans we have among ourselves.

Government has been working endlessly on policies and legislation to take
South Africa and the South African lifestyle to the heights of democracy.
What we have failed in is socialising our people into democracy and its
values and purpose. While it has certainly been rosy visualising our dream
for South Africa, our people have fast forgotten our past, and have become
isolated from humanitarianism and brotherhood. It was our brothers and
sisters of Africa and countries around the world that became an asylum to
so many of our comrades. Have we really forgotten this so soon?

However, I praise all the volunteers and donors that lent a hand to all the
victims displaced by xenophobic attacks.

The MF, however, feels that we need to further investigate the road
travelled and who the culprits were who were responsible for these attacks
around the country. Our hon President built and maintained great relations
around the continent and abroad. We need to salvage these relations and
work hard to recreate South African confidence and international trust.
This will certainly impact on the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament
and, I fear, on the international market that we are expecting.

We need to continue with our oversight in this matter and hopefully reach
consensus with the public about this in reintegrating displaced families
into the communities. The MF conveys its heartfelt thanks to the task team
for work well done. I thank you, Madam Chair. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Re le mokgatlo wa African People’s Convention, re leboha ha Palamente ya
rona e ile ya ntsha mokgupi wa Palamente wa mekgatlo yohle e Palamenteng ho
ya shebana le bothata ba ditwantshano tsa maAfrika a rona le baahi mane
Alexandra, Thembisa, Germiston, Reiger Park le Ramaphosaville. Re ellellwa
hore merusu ena e ile ya namela dibakeng tse kang Mamelodi, Atteridgeville,
Soshanguve le Motse-Kapa.

Mokgatlo wa APC o rata ho leboha ha setjhaba se amehang se ile sa utlwa
kgweletso ya hore “Marumo fatshe, bana ba thesele, ntwa ha se tharollo. ’O
ka nketsang’ ha e ahe motse, motse ke wa morapedi.” Batho bana ba maAfrika
ha se bona ba re nketseng naha le moruo wa yona. Ha e seke ya tshaba lehala
ya mathela moratheng.

APC e re phephi, lefu ke ngwetsi ya malapa ohle. Re lakaletsa bohle ba
lemetseng nameng le moyeng pholo le bophelo bo botle. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[As the African People’s Convention, we are pleased that our Parliament
sent a delegation of parliamentarians of all political parties that are in
Parliament to go and address the problem of violence perpetrated against
fellow Africans by locals in Alexandra, Thembisa, Germiston, Reiger Park
and Ramaphosaville. We are aware that this violence also spread to areas
such as Mamelodi, Atteridgeville, Soshanguve and Cape Town.

The APC would like to thank the affected communities for heeding the call
to “lay down arms”, because war is not the solution. Being arrogant is not
the right attitude, we have to be humble. These fellow Africans are not the
ones who took our land and our wealth. Let us not direct our anger at the
innocent people.
The APC would like to send its condolences to those who were affected,
because misfortune befalls us all. We wish all those who suffered both
emotional and physical harm a speedy recovery and good health.]

The government should declare all informal settlements in our country
disaster risk areas, as contemplated in Chapter 1 of the Disaster
Management Act, Act 57 of 2002, with the definition of “disaster”. Just as
with nodal areas, government is bound to channel resources where they are
most needed. In my observation, the attacks took place in areas affected by
poverty, most notably informal settlements.

We want to state that there are no “foreign nationals” amongst Africans
and, if it is government policy to name them that, then it must be
revisited. They must be called “Africans from our neighbouring countries”.
This will act as an antidote to xenophobia. Government should put processes
and systems in place to register these Africans on the country’s registers.
They must be accorded all the privileges in international protocols that we
are signatories to.

The APC is a Pan-Africanist organisation; we regard Africa as one continent
but subdivided by the colonialists and the imperialists through the Berlin
Act during the scramble for Africa in the 19th century. We regard you
Africans as our brothers and sisters. You are more than welcome in our
country. Please take stock of yourselves and become good residents in our
country. We are a peaceful nation, as you might have noticed. We are
patient, but our patience has a limit — do not overstretch it.

APC e qetela ka hore mathata a mangata ao re tobaneng le ona naheng ena,
empa a hloka mamello. Ha e lale makwala re none. Re a leboha. [The APC
concludes by saying that there are a lot of problems that we are faced with
in this country, but we need to be patient. Let peace reign supreme. We
thank you.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, in the two minutes allocated to me, let me
remark that what happened in our country and was called xenophobia has been
condemned by an overwhelming majority of our people. It is inexcusable, and
it must not be allowed to rear its ugly head again.

Moreover, it must not be dealt with superficially. We must be careful not
to deal with the symptoms of the disease, instead of the disease itself.
Therefore, thorough investigation and research must be done into why this
barbaric thing happened.

It is reported that a third of the people who were killed were South
Africans. If this was because of poverty, why was it the poor who were
targeted, and not those perceived to be rich?

Not long ago Africans of the African continent were united against
colonialism and apartheid. Their countries made a rich Pan-African
contribution to the liberation of South Africa. They were then appreciated
and loved. Why would South Africans now exchange this appreciation for acid
hatred? We must really know through thorough investigation the cause of
this political imbecility.

Africans cannot be foreigners in Africa — Africans have a common destiny.
We are sailing on the same ship — if it sails across the waters, we shall
all be safe; if it sinks, we shall all perish. When we were enslaved or
colonised, the authors of these inhuman acts never asked whether we were
Nigerians, Zimbabweans, Azanians or South Africans. They inflicted their
atrocities on every African, even in Jamaica or in America.

Let us also avoid discrimination against the citizens of this country with
regard to housing, employment and other areas. The citizens of this country
and those from the rest of Africa derive their rights from the Constitution
of this country, and not from the membership of any political party. Long
live Africa! Forward to the giant, monolithic state of Africa. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr K P MOTLANTHE: Madam Speaker, hon members, allow me to add my voice to
those who have commended the task team for a job well done. I would like to
commence by dealing with this big word, “xenophobia”, and also give content
to it by sharing with the House my experience of how people who are
compelled to live in fetid, squalid lean-to shacks can be ignited into
responses to their challenges which defy the very meaning of the word
“humanity”.

A few years ago – three years ago, to be precise – in the same township of
Alexandra, people living in lean-to shacks along the banks of the Jukskei
River had to be moved because those banks are made of ash and in the rainy
season the ground simply collapsed.  Because this was regarded as a
disaster by the provincial government of Gauteng, those people were then
moved to an area outside Dobsonville, Soweto – between Dobsonville and the
Randfontein Estate Gold Mine.

The people of Dobsonville, who themselves reside in an informal settlement
made up of lean-to shacks, demonstrated against these new arrivals,
described them as outsiders, and regarded them as a threat to the limited
possibilities of accessing better housing.

So when we use this word “xenophobia”, we should also be mindful of the
fact that people who live in informal settlements eke out a precarious
living. In certain cases “living” simply means “not dying”. It has no other
meaning, no other value beyond that.

If you add to that what hon Minister Trevor Manuel said yesterday about the
impact of inflation on the poorest of the poor, it means that a year ago
someone who tended the garden of those who had the means, and was therefore
able to feed a family with R200 earned over a month, can no longer do so.
This means the buying power of the limited means that they have is
depressed to such levels that they can no longer survive.

Therefore, if there is anybody in the community who possesses even a TV set
which is in a state of disrepair, such a person can be identified as a
legitimate target.

I’m saying this because if we were to go to the same areas where people
were attacked under the pretext of being foreigners or strangers, and
suggest to them that Tinashe Nengomasha who plays soccer for Kaizer Chiefs
should be repatriated to Zimbabwe with immediate effect, they would turn on
you and kill you for suggesting that.

What does this tell us? It tells us that human beings are never and can
never be fully defined by one element. So, the same people who would regard
Oliver Mthukuzi as an icon and who would be prepared to live in his back
yard, are able to attack others with the hope that they can gain something
that will bring relief to their desperate situation.

I want to plead that we should look at this issue in that context, so that
as we say the “yesizwe” [national] xenophobic attacks, we also understand
that this is not a permanent feature. It is a seasonal occurrence.

This is not just the experience of South Africa. Other countries go through
similar ups and downs as well. I recall that in the former Democratic
Republic of Germany in the olden days of the divide, there was a time when
the economy was doing so well that at airports and public places fruit was
even laid out for any traveller to collect in a little paper bag, so that
he or she could take some of the fruit as provisions on the long journey.
But when the downswing in the economy happened, they all of a sudden had
skinheads, people who were attacking others of Polish origin and so on.
However, in the early rosy days 60% of the workforce had been made up of
Polish nationals! We will have similar ups and downs in our country.

The point is: What does this tell us? What is the meaning of these attacks
and what should our response be? The task team has made a number of
recommendations which we as the ANC endorse. However, I think, correctly
speaking, we should also be saying that in the long term as a country, as a
nation, as a people, we should make sure that no human beings are compelled
to live in those fetid lean-to structures. [Applause.]

Earlier this year I had the privilege of having a discussion with the Chief
Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice of the Constitutional Court. In the
course of our discussion, they put the question to me of why people do not
seem to appreciate and understand the importance of the independence of the
judiciary. I responded by throwing a question to them. I said to them that
my feedback, as I interact with our people, is that they fail to understand
why, once people break the law, the courts find in their favour.

In cities such as Johannesburg there are many derelict buildings which are
in a bad state. The branding system is nonexistent. They are actually not
just a health hazard, but disasters waiting to happen. And people occupy
them — they squat. They occupy those buildings without authorisation,
without permission, in the same way as people occupy land which is not
serviced and squat on that land.

The courts, without fail, find in favour of those people. Even when the
city council says, “This building is dangerous to your own safety; get out
of the building so that we can renovate it,” a lawyer goes to court and the
court says, “You can’t move those people unless you provide them with
accommodation of a similar or better standard.”

So I threw this question back to the Chief Justice, and he promised me that
he would write an educational piece in two instalments to explain the basis
of such judgments in relation to the Bill of Rights. This is because I said
to him that our people say: “No, look, these people break the law.” That’s
the first thing, and the law enforcement units and the by-laws kick in and
they are then asked to leave, but the courts always protect them.

So what this whole experience tells us is that there is a convergence of
factors which underlie the eruption of this kind of violence, and that as a
country we should take steps to address these underlying factors.

We must also strive to ensure that we inculcate in our people an
understanding and acceptance of the concept of the rule of law - because if
we don’t do that, the general environment of lawlessness encourages people
to take advantage of the weaker.

As Parliament, as Members of this Parliament, I think we have a dual
responsibility: We have a responsibility to play the oversight role, but we
are also public representatives. We must be the eyes and ears of this
institution. As we go out to do our work, we must ensure that we listen,
and listen very carefully, to what our people have to say when they raise
their concerns, because they not only raise concerns but also provide
workable suggestions as to how these problems can be attended to.

I think we should live up to this responsibility. In that way we will be
able to address the need for the prestige that our country enjoys
internationally and ensure this blemish is well understood by our
neighbours, our friends and those who regard South Africa as a beacon of
hope. That’s our collective responsibility.

Therefore, regarding our national responsibility, I think the attacks were
tragic enough not to be used for purposes of point-scoring, but we should
truly try to respond in the spirit and manner in which diverse communities
responded to this tragedy. We as an institution should not use this tragedy
as an electioneering tool, but we should attend to these challenges as
people who are sincerely concerned and who seek to find solutions to the
problems. That is because, if we engage in grandstanding and apportioning
blame, in a manner which does not address the core challenges, we are doing
a disservice to those who sent us to this Parliament.

And, I think, with these words, on behalf of the ANC I also add my voice to
those commending the task team, and I hope that we will all play our role
in ensuring that this never ever happens again in South Africa. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Speaker of the National Assembly adjourned the Joint Sitting at 15:26.


