---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-06-19
---

THURSDAY, 19 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 15:42.

The House Chairperson (Mr T S Setona) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Me H LAMOELA: Agb Voorsitter, met die volgende sitting van die Raad sal ek
voorstel:


   Dat die Raad -


   (1)      kennis neem —


        (a)      van die geweldige armoede en ellende wat op Willow Park,
             ’n plaas in Zeerust in Noordwes, heers waar die waardigheid
             van mense op groot skaal geskend word;
        (b)      dat die Departement van Landbou in 2006 grond toegeken het
             aan ongeveer 100 plaaswerkers, maar steeds besig is met
             beplanning en met geen bystand en ontwikkeling tot dusver
             gehelp het nie;


        (c)      dat armoede hoogty vier, waar ongeveer 15 persone per
             bouvallige wooneenheid bly en dat kinders en grootmense dae
             lank sonder enige kos gaan;


        (d)      dat kinders nog op kaal sementvloere slaap en dat die
             distrik of plaaslike munisipaliteite onder ANC-beheer geen
             bystand verleen, nadat soveel beloftes gemaak is nie; en


        (e)      dat ‘‘charity begins at home’’ en dit skandelik is om te
             ervaar dat na 14 jaar in ’n demokratiese bestel, landsburgers
             se grondwetlike regte steeds geskend word; en


   (2)      dus ’n beroep op die Premier van die Noordwes doen om in te gryp
        sodat hierdie haglike omstandighede ter syde gestel kan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)


[Ms H LAMOELA: Hon Chairperson, at the next sitting of the House I shall
move:
   That the Council –

   (1)      notes -

       a) the severe poverty and distress prevailing at Willow Park, a farm
          in Zeerust in the North West, where people’s dignity is being
          violated on a large scale;

       b) that the Department of Agriculture allocated land to about 100
          farmworkers in 2006, but they are still engaged in planning and
          did not provide any assistance and development up to now;

       c) that poverty is rife, with about 15 persons residing in one
          dilapidated dwelling, and that children and adults have to live
          for days without food;

       d) that children are still sleeping on bare cement floors, while the
          district or local municipalities under ANC control are rendering
          no assistance despite making numerous promises; and

       e) that charity begins at home and how disgraceful it is to
          experience that, after 14 years into a democratic dispensation
          citizens’ constitutional rights are still being violated; and
(2)   therefore appeals to the Premier of the North West to intervene and
    bring relief to undo these perilous circumstances.]


Mnr J W LE ROUX: Agb Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:

   Dat die Raad kennis neem dat -


   (1)      die Minister van Justisie, mnr Patrick Chinamasa, op 18 Junie
        2008 bevestig het dat ‘‘Zanu-PF’’ oorlog sal maak as hulle die
        komende verkiesing in Zimbabwe sou verloor;


   (2)      die stille diplomasie van president Thabo Mbeki skouspelagtig
        misluk het;


   (3)      die gebeure in Zimbabwe die vure van Afrika-pessimisme verder
        aanblaas;


   (4)      alle patriotiese Suid-Afrikaners moet sorg dat die gebeure in
        Zimbabwe nie die demokrasie in Suid-Afrika skaad nie; en


   (5)      President Mbeki versoek word om in die openbaar sy misnoeë uit
        te spreek en om daadwerklike stappe te doen om die anargie in
        Zimbabwe te stop.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)
[Mr J W LE ROUX: Hon Chairperson, at the next sitting of the House I shall
move:

   That the Council notes that –

     1) Zimbabwe’s Minister of Justice, Mr Patrick Chinamasa, confirmed on
        18 June 2008 that Zanu-PF will make war if they should lose the
        coming election in Zimbabwe;

      2) the quiet diplomacy of President Mbeki has failed spectacularly;


      3) the events in Zimbabwe are fanning the fires of African pessimism
         even further;

      4) all patriotic South Africans must take care not to allow the events
         in Zimbabwe to harm the South African democracy; and

      5) President Mbeki should be urged to express his disapproval publicly
         and take decisive steps to halt the anarchy in Zimbabwe.]

                          MURDER OF MR T G DLAMINI

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that the tragic death of Mr Thembinkosi Gobsa Dlamini has
         left the community of Ngwelezana numb and devastated;


      2) further notes that, as Mr Dlamini was gunned down on Wednesday, 11
         June at 15:45 in the office that accommodated the South African
         Social Security Agency (Sassa), an urgent appeal is being made for
         tighter security in all such offices;

      3) conveys its condolences to his family and friends - may his soul
         rest in peace; and


      4) resolves that –

          a) corruption has to be clamped down on;


          b) investigations should lead to speedy arrest of perpetrators;
             and

          c) a call to return to “Ubuntu” be made.

   How can Dlamini be mowed down like that for the good job he was doing?
Motion  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section  65  of   the
Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF TASK TEAM OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT PROBING THE
                  VIOLENCE AND ATTACKS ON FOREIGN NATIONALS

There was no debate.

Question put.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I’m informed, hon members, that
there is no speakers’ list. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow
provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of vote, if they so
wish. Any declarations of vote?

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Supports.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?
Mr N J MACK: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the report agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS ON FOREIGNERS IN TOWNSHIPS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the motion, as printed
on the Order Paper, on behalf of the Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces:


   That the Council, noting that the spate of violence which broke out on 11
   May 2008 in Alexandra township in  Gauteng  and  later  spread  to  other
   provinces, mostly affected nationals from other  African  countries,  but
   also claimed South Africans amongst its  victims,  recalls  that  in  the
   preamble to our Constitution, we honour those who  suffered  for  justice
   and freedom in our land, we respect those who have worked  to  build  and
   develop our country and believe that South Africa belongs to all who live
   in it, united in our diversity, therefore resolves to –


     1)  thank  the  governments  and  people  of  the  continent  for  the
        solidarity and support shown during the struggle against apartheid;


     2) express its appreciation for the contribution of the continent  and
        the region in helping to build the economy of South Africa;


     3) reaffirm its commitment to African solidarity  and  integration  of
        the region and continent;


     4)  assure  Africa  and  the  world  that  these  incidents  were  not
        indicative of the views or the conduct of  the  majority  of  South
        African citizens;


     5)  acknowledge  the  sterling  work  done  by  government,  political
        parties, civil society,  nongovernmental  organisations,  community
        organisations and individual  South  African  citizens  to  provide
        humanitarian relief to displaced persons;


     6) convey the remorse of  the  Parliament  of  South  Africa,  as  the
        representatives of the people of South Africa, to all  Parliaments,
        governments and peoples on the African continent; and


     7) express its sincere sympathy  with  the  persons  affected  by  the
        violent attacks.

Question put.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): As there is no speakers’ list, I
shall now put the question. The question is that the motion be agreed to.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.

In the absence of declarations of vote, we shall now proceed to the voting
on the question, and I shall do this in alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: In favour.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyazekela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ondersteun. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Re a dumela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON(Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Ondersteun. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                       SUSPENSION OF JOINT RULE 154(2)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chairperson of
the National Council of Provinces, I move the motion as printed on the
Order Paper:

   That the Council: subject to the concurrence of  the  National  Assembly,
   suspends Joint  Rule  154(2),  which  provides  that  the  Joint  Tagging
   Mechanism may not classify a Bill before the expiry of the period  stated
   in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, in respect  of  the
   Repeal of the Black Administration Act  and  Amendment  of  Certain  Laws
   Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec  75)  (see
   Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 17 June 2008, p 1199).

Question put.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): As there is no speakers’ list, I
shall now put the question. The question is that the motion be agreed to.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the
opportunity to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.

In the absence of declarations of vote we shall now proceed to the voting
on the question, and I’ll do this in alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyakela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ondersteun. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Ondersteun. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Ondersteun. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces have voted in
favour. Therefore I declare the motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! Hon members, before I
proceed, I would like to welcome, on your behalf, the hon Minister of
Finance, Trevor Manuel, in our midst.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson and hon members, let me at this stage
express appreciation to the select committees who, jointly and separately,
had interrogated the budget applications and policy direction of
departments, either separately or in clusters. I think that it adds
immensely to the quality of democracy that we have in this country.

Clearly, a very important part of budget-making is to know that the elected
representatives of the people will maintain their oversight responsibility.
So this process, which is now being brought to conclusion, is essential
within a democracy because elections are fought on one basis, and that is
the right to be able to allocate resources to implement policy. So the
allocation choices and the implementation outcomes are matters that require
parliamentary oversight.

The Budget, this year, has been very different, of course, because the
social and economic context has been quite different. When we rose in the
National Assembly on 20 February to table the Budget, there were certain
issues that we drew to the attention of Parliament in the first instance
and to that of the entire country, and that is: Firstly, in relation to the
global economic slowdown and the credit crunch, these were matters that we
indicated. Our growth focus for the year was 4,2% as tabled then, but that
was way above where market consensus was. We still believe that a
significant part of that will be attained in this year.

The second issue that we drew our attention to was outside of our control
and that was the rising oil price putting extensive pressure on development
everywhere. When we tabled the Budget in February, the price of a barrel of
Brent crude oil was $99. I think Brent crude oil is now probably trading at
about $137 a barrel. That is a 40% increase in a very short space of time.

The third issue is that food prices have risen and we frequently feel that
this is a South African phenomenon, but in many parts of the world the
situation is a lot worse. The major staple food in South Africa is maize,
and over two years the maize price has risen by 69%. We have a position of
maize surpluses in South Africa at the moment. So, to some extent, the
import parity pricing doesn’t quite have to work. But if you look at
countries that have rice as their staple food and import rice, that price
has risen by 131% over two years.

It is no accident that the countries that have experienced the biggest food
riots are in fact those that are the biggest rice importers. These are
countries like Cameroon and Gabon in West Africa and Haiti in the western
hemisphere. But one can also see that Indonesia and other countries have
been affected by this. This is a phenomenon that we need to understand
because at the end of it people’s quality of life is measured and they look
to the Budget and also to the choices government is making. So, engaging
with the matters of the Budget is not a matter for the Select Committee on
Finance sitting in this House or the Joint Budget Committee. It is in fact
something that goes to the very heart of governance.

We don’t notice this when times are okay, but when times are tough I think
all of our constituencies speak to us and ask us about our decisions. So, I
think that perhaps this year, unlike previous years, there has been an
opportunity to ask tough questions to the departments on how the money will
be spent, how the policies will be supported and whether the quality of
life of people would be improved. Added to that, I think, is the issue that
has been constant throughout this year and will certainly be there when we
table the Budget in February. To some extent, one part of it closed
yesterday when the National Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa,
granted a 13,3% increase to Eskom, but I think the energy supply
constraints and the price issues have been very dominant and are likely to
remain like that.

In this context, I think the test is whether the previous decisions have
been taken - where to spend and what to spend on in this big debate that
has happened in this House and elsewhere are on a surplus or deficit. All
of those questions, I think, have to be revisited. And I think that I can
stand before this House without fear of contradiction, arguing that our
decisions have been correct in this regard.

We are running a very significant current account deficit. Therefore, we
have to borrow savings from elsewhere in the world. And if we want to do
that - if we also ran a deficit on the Budget - we would have to borrow
substantially more and we would be a lot more vulnerable. And part of what
the world is living through is a consequence of the fact that the United
States has been running deficits on both the current account and the
budget. So we, as a small open economy, have to take decisions differently.
It is in that context that we must then look at where we are spending our
money.

Also, let me repeat the outcomes of this spending. A lot of spending items
are of course that link with our future, and that is education. But we must
ask the questions beyond how much we are spending and ask what the money
buys beyond teachers’ salaries and what we believe our schoolbooks cost.
We’ve got to ask what the money buys and whether the quality of education
is improving.

Again, what we’ve seen this year is that our public spending has grown very
sharply, and there has been this public debate as well our fiscal position
to be conservative. We’ve been able to demonstrate that with the economy
growing at around 4,5%, and public spending growing at 9,3% a year above
inflation for a long period of time. Even this year, whilst our spending is
still strong around the 6,8% mark above inflation, it is lower than in
previous years but still stronger and still favourable towards spending in
respect of housing, the environment, education, health and social security.

And against that, on the other side of the line, the tax measures have been
moderate and maintained. So, even on issues such as a fuel tax, people
think that government earns more when the crude oil price rises. In fact,
we tend to lose some money because people drive less. We have a tax of 127
cents per litre; regardless of whether the oil price was $99, as it was the
other day, or $140 or $200, it will be 127 cents a litre notwithstanding.

Also, I think that in public finances the interest of this House would be
primarily with the other spheres of government to ensure that the provinces
and municipalities receive appropriate funding and then that they budget in
line with national priorities, and that we see to it that the concurrent
functions are properly funded and that the spending is properly
implemented.

The hon Robinson has raised the issue of libraries in this House. I think
hon members know that if we have allocated resources, somebody has to
answer on behalf of all taxpayers whether the allocations in provinces and
cities have actually funded the libraries that we have discussed in this
House. And that’s the continuity of parliamentary oversight and that is
what makes the discussion that we are concluding today so important.

Let me conclude by saying that we are going to live through very difficult
periods. It’s going to be a highly politically charged period but it is
also going to be a period when times are going to be tough not just in
South Africa, but all over the world. One of the biggest hedge fund
managers, somebody who has made a heck of lot of money over the past five
years, has said things in banks have been bad and that they are going to
get worse over the next year. That is a signal of a lead story in the
Financial Times today. We are not going to be isolated from that.

Therefore, my plea to hon members of this House is to ensure that we remain
abreast of developments. We don’t all have to pretend that we are
economists but we are here because we chose to serve our people. And in the
service of our people, we are also conduits for decisions and we must
understand all of these events and ensure that our people are informed. We
can say to our people repeatedly that we won’t mask the difficulties, that
we won’t tell lies, that we won’t claim easy victories and that times are
going to be tough, but we have to be responsible in the way in which we
take decisions. It is public money and we only have the privilege of
looking after it for all South Africans.

Thank you very much, Chair, and thank you to the hon members who are
listening. [Applause.]

Mr T S RALANE: Thank you, Chairperson. Colleagues, I’ve got a small mandate
which is to reflect on the events that took place in the House in the last
three weeks. Firstly, we seemed to be from different planets. Listening to
the Budget Vote debates that took place in the House, there seems to be
excessive back-patting. I think it’s an issue that is really worrisome
because it is a matter that has to do with us as legislators.

Secondly, one of the critical things that came out in the debates, even
yesterday, was the fact that members in the House argued on behalf of
departments for more funding and I think it is a terrible situation. I
think as we do our oversight it becomes critical for us to look at the
allocated resources. It is not our responsibility to argue for more funding
for people. Our responsibility is to focus on the little they have received
and the extent to which it has been used by them accordingly. Therefore,
the critical issue that we should have been looking at is the quality of
spending.

Firstly, what has the R20 million been spent on? Secondly, is there value
for money? If the department was given R20 million, in terms of what it has
done, was there value for money? It was something that we really needed to
deal with. Thirdly, were there any projects. We are going to do our
constituency work now and will be confronted by the communities wanting to
know whether there are projects on the ground. Fourthly, how sustainable
are these projects?

We had a discussion in last week, during the FFC recommendations, where
people were talking about bridges, and roads that are built and not
maintained. A road is built, the rain comes and it is washed away. So
issues of sustainability are critical, as are efficiency and economic
effectiveness.

Let me share something with the members briefly. There is a report, for
instance, that we have here, and these are preliminary results from the
education departments across the country that are out on 31 March. There is
a huge underspending on personnel in the Eastern Cape that amounts to R157
million. There’s a huge underspending of capital in the Eastern Cape which
comes to about R161 million, but then there is overspending on something
called nonpersonnel and noncapital expenditure. Gauteng has an overall
underspending of R819 million. An amount of R243 million is underspent on
personnel or educators. A total of R270 million is underspent on capital
expenditure in Gauteng. Now, nonpersonnel and noncapital expenditure comes
to R358 million. In KwaZulu-Natal there is a total of R45 million
underspending on personnel and R37 million underspending on capital
expenditure, R29 million on nonpersonnel and noncapital expenditure and so
forth.

The questions that arise are: What are the implications of these trends in
respect of the quality of education? What are the implications of
underspending in Gauteng and the Eastern Cape in respect of educator-
learner ratios, given the migration patterns that people are talking about?


Let’s go onto health: There is a huge underspending of R427 million on
nonpersonnel and noncapital expenditure in the Eastern Cape. What this is
telling us is that the biggest chunk here is drugs. What is the story? The
story might be that there are no drugs in the Eastern Cape in clinics and
hospitals and that’s the bottom line. So clearly there are issues of
serious engagement with, firstly, the strategic plans and, secondly, the
reports.

KwaZulu-Natal has a huge underspending of capital which comes to a total of
R278 million; Gauteng, R185 million in the health department; Mpumalanga,
R165 million; and Northern Cape, R124 million. And then there’s housing.
There was R500 million withheld in the Eastern Cape, but still the Eastern
Cape underspent by a total of R161 million. The Free State underspent too.

These are the kind of issues that we are going to be faced with as we are
dealing with this Appropriation Bill. The Appropriation Bill is providing
more money in many areas, but are we ready to do oversight over this money.
As we speak, the preliminary underspending across nine provinces is R2,6
billion. We were not sure, when the books were audited, what the picture
was going to be like. So clearly this is the kind of challenge that is
facing all of us as we deal with this Appropriation Bill today; so much
money at provincial and national government level. We therefore plead that
the House adopts this Appropriation Bill. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! That concludes the debate. I
shall now put the Votes in the order in which they appear on the Schedule
to the Bill. I’ll now put Vote number one; any objection?

Vote No 1 – The Presidency – put.

Mr A WATSON: You are not going to see the objections in front of you,
Chair; they are here. The DA wishes to record its objection.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, the objection of the DA
will be noted.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 2 — Parliament — put and agreed to.

Vote No 3 — Foreign Affairs — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 4 — Home Affairs — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 5 — Public Works — put and agreed to.

Vote No 6 — Government Communication and Information System — put and
agreed to.

Vote No 7 — National Treasury — put and agreed to.

Vote No 8 — Public Service and Administration — put and agreed to.

Vote No 9 — Public Service Commission — put and agreed to.

Vote No 10 — South African Management Development Institute (Samdi) — put
and agreed to.

Vote No 11 — Statistics South Africa — put and agreed to.


Vote No 12 — Arts and Culture — put and agreed to.

Vote No 13 — Education — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 14 — Health — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Independent Democrats and Freedom
Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 15 — Labour — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 16 — Social Development — put and agreed to.

Vote No 17 — Sport and Recreation South Africa — put.
Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 18 — Correctional Services — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 19 — Defence — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Independent Democrats and Freedom
Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 20 — Independent Complaints Directorate — put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

AYES - 26: Adams, F; Botha, D J; Gamede, D D; Goeieman, C M; Kgarebe, K A;
Kolweni, Z S; Mack, N J; Madlala-Magubane, N M; Manyosi, A T; Masilo, J M;
Matlanyane, H F; Mchunu, A N T; Mkono, D G; Moatshe, P; Mokoena, M L;
Mqungquthu, N S S; Ntembe, B L; Ntwanambi, N D; Qikani, A N D; Ralane, T S;
Sibiya, J M; Sogoni, E M; Sulliman, M A; Tau, R J; Tolo, B J; Van Rooyen, C
J.
NOES — 10: Chen, S S; Krumbock, G R; Lamoela, H; Le Roux, J W; Robinson, D;
Thetjeng, O M; Van der Merwe, D J P; Van Heerden, F J; Watson, A; Worth, D
A.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 21 — Justice and Constitutional Development — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 22 — Safety and Security — put.

Division demanded.


The Council divided:


AYES — 26: Adams, F; Botha, D J; Gamede, D D; Goeieman, C M; Kgarebe, K A;
Kolweni, Z S; Mack, N J; Madlala-Magubane, N M; Manyosi, A T; Masilo, J M;
Matlanyane, H F; Mchunu, A N T; Mkono, D G; Moatshe, P; Mokoena, M L;
Mqungquthu, N S S; Ntembe, B L; Ntwanambi, N D; Qikani, A N D; Ralane, T S;
Sibiya, J M; Sogoni, E M; Sulliman, M A; Tau, R J; Tolo, B J; Van Rooyen, C
J.


NOES — 10: Chen, S S; Krumbock, G R; Lamoela, H; Le Roux, J W; Robinson, D;
Thetjeng, O M; Van der Merwe, D J P; Van Heerden, F J; Watson, A; Worth, D
A.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 23 — Agriculture — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 24 — Communications — put and agreed to.

Vote No 25 — Environmental Affairs and Tourism - put and agreed to.

Vote No 26 — Housing — put and agreed to.

Vote No 27 — Land Affairs — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 28 — Minerals and Energy — put.

Division demanded.
The Council divided:


AYES — 25: Adams, F; Botha, D J; Gamede, D D; Goeieman, C M; Kgarebe, K A;
Kolweni, Z S; Mack, N J; Madlala-Magubane, N M; Manyosi, A T; Masilo, J M;
Matlanyane, H F; Mchunu, A N T; Mkono, D G; Moatshe, P; Mokoena, M L;
Mqungquthu, N S S; Ntwanambi, N D; Qikani, A N D; Ralane, T S; Sibiya, J M;
Sogoni, E M; Sulliman, M A; Tau, R J; Tolo, B J; Van Rooyen, C J.

NOES — 10: Chen, S S; Krumbock, G R; Lamoela, H; Le Roux, J W; Robinson, D;
Thetjeng, O M; Van der Merwe, D J P; Van Heerden, F J; Watson, A; Worth, D
A.


ABSTAIN — 1: Ntembe, B L.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 29 — Provincial and Local Government — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 30 — Public Enterprises — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Independent Democrats and Freedom
Front Plus dissenting).


Vote No 31 — Science and Technology — put and agreed to.

Vote No 32 — Trade and Industry — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 33 — Transport — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 34 — Water Affairs and Forestry — put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Schedule put and agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                      SOCIAL ASSISTANCE AMENDMENT BILL
                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, it gives me great pleasure to make this
statement on the Social Assistance Amendment Bill on behalf of the select
committee. The Bill before us is long overdue. Allow me to quote from the
preamble of our Constitution:


   We, the people of South Africa, recognise the injustices of our past;
   honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land; respect
   those who have worked to build and develop our country; and believe that
   South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity.


   ... improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of
   each person ...

Subsection 3 of section 9 in Chapter 2 of the Constitution on the Bill of
Rights is very clear under the equality clause that says, and I quote:


  The state may not unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against
  anyone on one or more grounds, including race, gender, sex, pregnancy,
  marital status, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age,
  disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and birth.

We, as the ANC, resolved at the 52nd national conference in Polokwane that
we would equalise the age of people who qualify for old age pensions. In
the case of men, they have access to the old age pension when they have
attained the age of 65. The implementation of this Act will be done in
phases up until 2010. This will be equalised in full.

During the state of the nation address, the President indicated that
government will equalise the age of eligibility for the old age grant
between men and women. When implemented, men will also be able to access
the old age grant when they attain the age of 60. Men who attained the age
of 63 after 1 April 2008, men who attained the age of 61 after 1 April 2009
and men who attained the age of 60 after 1 April 2010, will receive an old
age grant. Everybody will be on par by that time.

The Social Assistance Amendment Bill seeks to amend the Social Assistance
Act, Act 13 of 2004. The purpose of this amendment is to do the following:
To regulate the eligibility of men for an older person’s grant; to make
further provision for the consideration of appeals against the SA Social
Security Agency, Sassa, by an independent tribunal; and to provide for
matters connected therewith. The Bill makes provision for the amendment of
section 10 of the Act so as to equalise the ages of eligibility for men and
women for an old age grant over a period of time as suggested by the
Minister of Finance in his Budget Speech. The Minister of the Department of
Social Development must also appoint an appeal tribunal to look into all
appeals against Sassa decisions.

In conclusion, we will make sure that we go and convey this message of
great achievement to all our people in our constituencies as members of
this House. We ask the House to support the Bill. I thank you, Chair.
Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question in
respect of the Fourth Order. The question is that the Bill, B17-2008, be
agreed to. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I need to ascertain very clearly whether delegation heads are
present in the Chamber.

I shall now also allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations
of vote in terms of Rule 71, if they so wish. Is there any province wishing
to make any declaration of vote? There is obviously none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mnu E M SONGONI: Elethu. [We agree.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyavuma. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Mpumalanga ondersteun. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?
Mr Z S KOLWENI: Re a e thekga. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Die Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [The Western Cape supports.]

[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Bill  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section   65   of   the
Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON NCOP VISIT TO LIMPOPO IN TERMS OF PROGRAMME OF
                       TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson and colleagues, we are gathered here today on
the issue relating to Taking Parliament to the People in Limpopo province,
which occurred in 2005. This is a province with towns that have peculiar
names such as Phalaborwa — a mining town that is the entry point to the
wonderful Kruger National Park. The town’s name means “better than
Johannesburg”.

Indeed, we are better than what many think. We are an emerging platinum,
diamond and coal-mining province, but our province also includes many other
minerals. The only major work we have to do —with the help of the
Department of Minerals and Energy — is the beneficiation for the
communities where these mines are located.

Prospecting is continuing at a high rate in the province and the hopes are
very high that more of the minerals and/or mines will be found.

There are many good things that are happening in Limpopo.  There are also
challenges. Let me deal with the challenges around the special schools that
we visited namely, Letaba and Yingisani. Firstly, there are teachers who
are not properly trained to teach learners with special needs. I think that
this is a problem that does not only occur in Limpopo, but across the
country.

I also believe that, as a country, we are starting to take these particular
kids very seriously because we will be losing a nation if we do not take
good care of them.

It becomes very difficult - maybe impossible - to teach a learner in sign
language when the teacher is not skilled in the area of sign language. Both
the teacher and the learner easily get frustrated, and no teaching and
learning occurs. It is one of the challenges we found during the Taking
Parliament to the People Programme. When we were doing a report-back, we
also found that many of these issues are still outstanding.

These schools had challenges that we identified in 2005, but nothing was
done by 27 to 29 August 2007, when a report-back visit was undertaken. In
fact, pertaining to the special schools, when the select committee, led by
the hon Sulliman, visited the province early this year, the committee found
out that the situation has not changed much in the two schools we had
visited.

Many of the principals had more complaints to raise than telling us good
stories. The teacher-learner ratio is still very high in these special
schools, and nonteaching staff is employed on a temporary basis, year-in
and year-out. This is an untenable situation and we really need to correct
it.

Some of the major challenges at these schools are things like the shortage
of classrooms. I believe that there is a great need for special schools to
be taken care of. As much as we are talking about the shortage of
facilities in normal schools, we believe that there is a special need to
attend to these special schools.

There is also a shortage of hostel accommodation. As learners come from far-
away places, they need to be accommodated at these schools, and these
facilities are not as available as they are supposed to be.
Diagnostic and audiological facilities for learners with impaired hearing
are not there, and there is a need to attend to those. Upgrading of sports
facilities must be done.

Lack of well-equipped libraries and adequate computers are also cause for
concern. Recreational halls to promote drama, music, indoor sport, etc are
also not there. There is also a high rate of burglary in these types of
schools owing to a lack of security fencing.

We believe that as much as you find that there is no security fencing in
normal schools, it becomes even more difficult in the special schools where
you do not have proper security fencing.

There were also challenges around the boreholes. Some of the problems
relating to the lack of boreholes at some schools have been dealt with. At
Yingisani special-needs school, the only notable progress was the provision
of eight mobile classrooms that used to be lacking. Otherwise some of the
things have not been attended to. We want to encourage authorities to do
so.

At Hans Merensky School there is notable progress, with educators who were
on contract now being appointed on a permanent basis, for instance.

Infrastructure challenges which were there have now been attended to. The
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has ensured provision of potable
water by providing much-needed boreholes.

The biggest challenge facing special schools in Limpopo and many parts of
South Africa is that they are not prioritised in the planning process. We
have discovered that it is as if they are considered last in the main
planning process.

The health centres also had challenges, but some of these have been
resolved. Some of these challenges had included high staff turnover;
unfilled vacancies; and a lack of transport for urgent transfers. Emergency
medical services had been decentralised to deal with some of these
problems.

However, in places where there was insufficient water, boreholes had been
put in place.

The other biggest challenge around the health centres was the lack of
telephones and faxes. Cellular phones were supplied for emergencies. We
believe that more can be done around the issues at the health centres.

Outstanding issues in this area include the lack of security fencing around
health centres. We believe that this is something that has to be attended
to. Dilapidated infrastructure is also a concern. On the main, there are
issues that are being attended to by the relevant department. It is just
that it is taking much longer for them to attend to these issues.

We really believe that the matters that were identified need to be dealt
with by the authorities. There are good things that have happened. For
instance, the schools that did not have material now have the material they
lacked.

There are issues that we believe the province needs to improve on. However,
there are other issues that have been dealt with. I don’t want to take much
of your time. Thank you so much, Chairperson.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wants to make a declaration? We shall now proceed to the voting in
alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?
Mr A T MANYOSI: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyavuma. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z C KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:54.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Matters Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Public Works


          a) Built Environment Professions Bill [B 53 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31093 of 30 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
             Works of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

     (2)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


          a) Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31063 of 16 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Minerals and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


3.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 19 June 2008:


          a) Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 77).


          b) Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2008 (Reprint)]
             (National Assembly – sec 76).


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted


    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 19 June 2008 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Matters Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
             and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Housing
   Development Agency Bill [B 1B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated
   18 June 2008:


     The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the subject
     of the Housing Development Agency Bill [B 1B – 2008] (National Assembly
     – sec 76) referred to it and classified by the JTM as a section 76
     Bill, reports the bill with amendments [B 1C – 2008].


   Report to be considered


2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
   on the Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
   Amendment Bill [B50 -2008] (National Assembly- sec 75), dated 19 June
   2008.


     The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
     considered the subject of the Repeal of Black Administration Act and
     Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B50 -2008] (National Assembly-
      sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

