---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 February 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-02-20
---

WEDNESDAY, 20 FEBRUARY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, Mr President Thabo Mbeki, Deputy
President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, distinguished Cabinet colleagues, hon
members, President of the ANC Jacob Zuma ... [Applause.] ... Governor and
Deputy Governors of the SA Reserve Bank, distinguished MECs, members of the
diplomatic corps, our dear friends in the gallery, and wherever you may be
sharing with us, fellow South Africans, ladies and gentlemen. A lot about
economics stands to be quite highfalutin and people choose to use big words
and these are sometimes difficult concepts and it appears as though a small
group of people can talk about it. Yet, the truth about economics is that
it touches each of our lives every single day and it is very important that
we take it out of this little group and ensure that more people can
participate in discussions about economics. It is necessary that we break
it down to the most basic concepts and indeed, if I were the weatherman, I
would draw the attention of this House to the fact that firstly, the global
economy grew by an average of 5% from 2003 to 2007.

This was a period of robust expansion but also of widening international
imbalances. Now, however, there are storm clouds ahead. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

In North America, severe turbulence in the housing market will continue to
rock credit markets right across the world and lower the near-term
prospects for growth in this, the world’s largest economy. The losses due
to bad lending practices in the United States’ housing markets appear to be
worse than we thought. The most recent estimates reflect a combined loss to
the banks of some US$400 billion. These disruptions have travelled across
the global landscape very rapidly, because finance capital knows no
boundaries and globalisation’s trade currents reach every corner of the
world.

Higher oil prices are lowering growth prospects right across Europe into
Japan and raising the inflation outlook everywhere. In contrast, China’s
economy continues to expand rapidly. Last year it grew by 10% and is
expected to grow by 9,5% in 2008. This is driven by booming exports in
China and an investment to GDP ratio of 45%.

Yet even these regions of Asia with their high savings and investment rates
will see some moderation as a result of weaker demand for their exports,
and international investors’ aversion to warm climates and clearly will
slow other emerging market economies.

China’s expansion and global growth have impacted on the prices of many
commodities, including oil. For us in South Africa some of this is good
news – higher prices benefit mineral-rich economies like our own. In
contrast, rising food and fuel prices cause discomfort and hardship. For
the time being the crosscurrents of commodity prices remain supportive of
economic growth in many parts of the African continent, for South Africa
and Australia. But there are signs of uncertainty: Since the beginning of
the year, for example, R24 billion in foreign holdings of rand-denominated
bonds and equities has been sold.

These are issues that we need to take account of as we give consideration
to the environment within which we need to table before this House the
Budget for 2008-09.

Our economy’s longer term outlook, however, remains favourable. Key policy
anchors are in place to provide a solid mooring while enabling the economy
to adapt to the crosscurrents. The prudent fiscal stance, international
reserves of US$33,6 billion – built up by the SA Reserve Bank, the
inflation targeting regime and a floating exchange rate cushion us against
shocks and reduce pressure on interest rates.

We took these decisions early and we implemented them when times were good.
We took them in the face of some severe criticism, even in this House. It
is precisely because of the macroeconomic policies put in place since 1996
and the fiscal stance in operation that we can be confident that we will
weather this storm. We have seen investment as a share of GDP rise from
about 15% to 21%. Our sound footing will enable us to grow at a faster
pace, and generate the resources to broaden participation and improve the
lives of all South Africans both progressively and sustainably.

Asizukulinda amathonzi abanzi. [Ihlombe.] [We will not wait for more
trouble.] [Applause.]

Madam Speaker, the South African economy has expanded continuously since
September 1999. Its pace of growth slowed slightly in 2001 and 2002, and
since 2003 we have grown by an average of 5% a year. This is the longest
continuous period of growth on record. GDP per person has increased by over
20% since 2000. During the past five years, employment has increased at a
faster pace than at any point in the past twenty years, adding over 1,5
million jobs.

As we present a picture of where we are now, we must also tell South
Africans and the world that our ship is stronger and we are better prepared
than during the previous episodes of global turmoil. It is time for neither
gloom nor panic. [Applause.]

Having said that, I think it is important that we realise that the course
ahead will be a bit tougher. It is important that we understand that we are
all in this together – business and community organisations, labour and
government; the employed, the self-employed and the unemployed; the urban
and rural; men and women. We may not all be affected in the same way, but
we face the same headwinds and uncertainties. None of us has the privilege
of perfect foresight; none of us is isolated from the tides and turbulence
of the global markets.

Ga re beng ngata e tee. [Legoswi.] [Let us stick together.] [Applause.] We
are in this together.

During periods of uncertainty, it is important that we keep focused on the
things required to raise long-term growth. The circumstances call to each
one of us to do more, to act with greater determination and to act
together. This Budget and many of government’s programmes and plans
contribute to raising our growth potential in the future. Our investments
in physical infrastructure, education and skills, research and development,
in fighting crime and contributing to regional peace are aimed at improving
our growth prospects and broadening opportunity, so that when the storm
abates we will grow even faster, with more equitable outcomes. Hon members,
we are not focused on the storm. We are focused on the period after the
storm. What we do before the storm and during the storm is exceedingly
important for what happens hereafter.

Investment in fixed capital expanded rapidly in 2007 and will remain a key
support to GDP growth over the medium term, driven by widespread public
sector infrastructure development and its effects on private investment and
capacity. Spending on energy-intensive projects may be deferred over the
medium term. Growth in fixed capital formation is expected nonetheless to
average near 10% over the next three years.

During the course of 2007 food prices increased by over 10%. Mainly driven
by global factors and poor weather at home in 2006, the price of a 12,5kg
bag of mealie meal, the staple diet for most South Africans, increased from
about R37 to R49. This is also a global problem. The prices of basic
foodstuffs – maize, wheat, soy beans and rice – have increased as a result
of changing climatic conditions and rising demand. Supply constraints for
goods such as cement and refined petrol and diesel added to the
inflationary pressures, pushing up inflation to 8,6% in December last year
and an average of 6,5% for all of 2007. As is always the case when
inflation rises, the poor have been hardest hit.

Madam Speaker, we recognise the hardships that all South Africans are
experiencing as a result of higher food and petrol prices. We also commend
the work of the Competition Commission and the Competition Tribunal for
their diligence in investigating companies that collude to keep prices
higher than they ought to be. [Applause.]

We want to give all South Africans the assurance that this government is
vigilant and will act in instances where companies collude to profit from
the impoverishment of ordinary people. While we may debate the best method
of fighting inflation, there can be no doubt in the minds of caring South
Africans that rising prices must be countered and that this must remain the
key objective of monetary policy.

The steps taken by the Reserve Bank to bring down inflation are working.
Inflation is projected to fall within the target range by the end of this
year and to average 4,9% in 2009. A policy stance that accommodates higher
inflation can surely not be consistent with a government that is intent on
reducing poverty.

One of the points of vulnerability in our economy is that we import far
more than we export – this gap, called the current account deficit, has now
widened to an estimated R143 billion a year. This is partly because we are
investing heavily in infrastructure expansion; we are importing machinery
and capital goods, in addition to the imports of fuel and other goods. The
value of our exports, although boosted by high commodity prices, is
insufficient to pay for our imports. The South African economy evidently
has a savings ratio that is too low to support our levels of growth. This
gap, of almost R3 billion a week now, has to be financed by savings from
abroad.

The current account deficit makes the economy more vulnerable, especially
during times of stress in global financial markets. Our ability to continue
boosting investment to drive long-term growth therefore depends on
increasing savings and expanding exports.

Further progress is required on the microeconomic policy front if we are to
address this macroeconomic imbalance. Barriers to faster export growth
include skills shortages, transport capacity constraints, high
telecommunications costs and tariffs that raise the price of imported
intermediate and capital goods. These are challenges we need to address
jointly with all stakeholders – business, labour, government and regulators
- for the process of discovery of microeconomic solutions is at least as
important as the decision itself.

Again, we say:

Singabemi, urhulumente, abasebenzi nezoshishino, siyimbumba. [As citizens,
government, labour and business, we are united.]
We are in this together. [Applause.] There is no escape for any part of it.
I want to address myself to Mr Vavi. There is no escape for any of us. We
are in this together. [Laughter.]

Madam Speaker, our integration into the world economy is a circumstance of
modern times and we would not wish to retreat into some disengaged zone of
false hopes and self-defeating loneliness. But we have no sympathy with the
view that globalisation is there on a “take it or leave it” basis, and all
we can do is to have more or less of it on its own terms. No! We seek to
engage with the world economy on terms that are fair and that will benefit
all our people.

In his recent book on social democratic policy challenges, Harvard academic
Roberto Unger, who is currently a Minister in President Lula’s Cabinet in
Brazil, speaks of the need to energise democracy by confronting the
interplay of global and local forces, by building the capacity to negotiate
from a position of strength, by mobilising the resources of local knowledge
and national capabilities. Unger points out, for example, that higher
national savings is about expanding the scope to benefit from
globalisation, and fiscal and monetary policies must be focused both on
adapting to new circumstances and strengthening local institutions.

It was in this spirit, Madam Speaker, that we embarked on our
Reconstruction and Development Programme in 1994, and we constructed a
macroeconomic framework in 1996 that was of our own making and not dictated
by external multilateral institutions. In revisiting our strategic
priorities for the decade ahead, we therefore have to engage proactively
with the global environment, its threats and opportunities, while remaining
firmly rooted in the principles on which our democracy was founded.

Die mandaat wat ons uit die aanhef tot die Grondwet verkry, dwing ons om
eerstens die verdeeldheid van die verlede te heel en ’n samelewing gegrond
op demokratiese waardes, maatskaplike geregtigheid en basiese menseregte te
skep. Tweedens, verwag dit van ons om die grondslag te lê vir `n
demokratiese en oop samelewing waarin regering gegrondves is op die wil van
die bevolking en elke burger gelyk deur die reg beskerm sal word. Derdens,
vra dit vir ons dat die lewensgehalte van alle burgers verhoog moet word en
dat die potensiaal van elke mens ontsluit moet word. En dan vra dit ook dat
ons ’n verenigde en demokratiese Suid-Afrika sal bou, wat sy regmatige plek
as ’n soewereine staat in die gemeenskap van nasies sal inneem.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The mandate that we draw from the preamble to our Constitution, in the
first instance, compels us to heal the divisions of the past and establish
a society based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human
rights. Secondly, it asks of us to lay the foundations for a democratic and
open society in which government is based on the will of the people and
every citizen enjoys equal protection by the law. In the third instance, it
requires of us to enhance the quality of life of all citizens and that the
potential of each person should be unlocked. And then it proposes that we
build a united and democratic South Africa, able to take its rightful place
as a sovereign state in the family of nations.]

Let me repeat: The mandate that we draw from the preamble to our
Constitution compels us to heal the divisions of the past and establish a
society based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human
rights. It asks of us to lay the foundations for a democratic and open
society in which government is based on the will of the people and every
citizen is protected by law. It requires of us to improve on the quality of
life of all citizens and free the potential of each person; and then it
mandates us to build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its
rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of nations.

Madam Speaker, we invited reflection at this time last year on whether our
policies and spending programmes give proper recognition to the idea, which
we affirm once again, that “human life has equal worth”. Freedom has
afforded us the opportunity to build a society that is different, built on
the principle of social solidarity; the recognition that each of our
destinies is inextricably intertwined.

This is a question to which we will have to return, again and again, in the
context of our own war on poverty, in the context of our infrastructure
utilities and financial institutions and their regulation, but also in the
context of the global environment of which we are a part. And in this
regard, Madam Speaker, there are steps we have to take to change the legacy
we will leave our children: Adjustments to our growth path we have to make
as a global community, as nations working together, as citizens of a shared
humanity, in response to the challenge of climate change and environmental
responsibility.

We are in these things together; the war on poverty, the war for
infrastructure development, the ongoing battles for financial stability,
the need to respond to global warming. We share these obligations, as rich
and poor, urban and rural, men and women, business and community
organisations, labour and government. We share these, because we march
together under the banner of social solidarity to improve the lives of all
of our people.

Ga re beng ngata e tee. [Let us stick together.]

We are in this together.

The economic expansion since 1999 has allowed public spending to rise
rapidly in all areas. We have accelerated investment in housing, water,
sanitation and economic infrastructure. We have extended education
services, health care, welfare programmes social grants, policing and
access to the courts, we are strengthening the machinery of government and
enhancing South Africa’s contribution to Africa’s development and conflict
resolution.

Over the period ahead, government’s spending plans will again allow for a
progressive extension of public services, informed by the “apex priorities”
outlined by President Mbeki in the state of the nation address.

Our high rate of unemployment still remains our greatest economic
challenge. Over the past decade we have done much to reshape the economy
and since 2002 there has been significant progress in job creation. But our
response to the unemployment challenge needs to be better coordinated –
this is at the centre of our war on poverty. In particular, efforts to
increase employment of young people have to be intensified and skills
development better focused. Options for a wage subsidy to contribute to
employment creation are being examined. Tax measures introduced in this
budget broaden the internship allowance to include longer term
apprenticeships, targeted at technical skills.

Support for small businesses is also focused on encouraging job creation.
Over the longer term, the shift towards a more energy-efficient economy
will be positive for employment creation and our land and agricultural
policies have key roles to play.

This Budget supports our industrial policy framework, through an additional
R2,3 billion for the Department of Trade and Industry over the next three
years and tax incentives of R5 billion in support of industrial investment
and employment creation. Having said that, business development is not a
core responsibility of government, but where it contributes to the
broadening opportunities, to drawing the marginalised and excluded into the
mainstream of economic activity, then it has a rightful claim on public
support. And yes, this House and every taxpayer shares with us a
responsibility to question continuously whether our incentives are based on
sound policies and criteria, not on favours or special interests
masquerading as the public good.

This Budget recognises that there is considerable scope for job creation in
several areas of public service delivery. Programmes under the umbrella – I
don’t like using that word - of the Expanded Public Works Programmes which
have demonstrated the ability to create jobs are supported with a further
R1 billion over the period ahead. Social development programmes such as
early childhood development, the expansion of Grade R enrolment and
community and
home-based care, for which funds are allocated to provinces, are labour
intensive and contribute strongly to social cohesion in poor communities.

Alongside job creation, government’s poverty reduction strategy also
prioritises the social security net and extends the social wage – which
includes services such as water, electricity, sanitation, education, health
care and public transport.

Madam Speaker, the progressive extension of social security is a central
element of our anti-poverty strategy, made possible by the fiscal space
created over the past decade. An interdepartmental task team has made
progress over the past year in developing the proposed framework for a
contributory social security system to complement our social assistance
grants programmes, and the regulatory overhaul of the retirement fund
industry is currently in progress. We are talking of a mandatory system of
retirement, which is work in progress. These are complex reforms that will
give practical content to our social solidarity commitment over the long
term. This year will see the start of an engagement within Nedlac on
implementation challenges.

In this Budget, we are able to announce several steps in extending social
security over the period ahead. The social grant increases this year match
or exceed inflation, and take into account the disproportionate impact of
price increases on the poor. The maximum values of the disability and old
age grants will increase by R70 a month to R940 in April ... [Applause.]
... while the child support grant will increase by R10 in April and by a
further R10 in October, to R220 a month. [Applause.] Together with measures
to extend the social security net, the additional social assistance cost
amounts to R12 billion over the next three years. The total number of grant
beneficiaries is currently 12,4 million, and the expenditure on social
assistance will be R75,3 billion next year.

Drawing on the work of the interdepartmental team on social security
reform, we will begin to address the difficulties of the present means
tests. The qualifying household income threshold for the child support
grant will be raised and the means test formula that applies to the old age
grant and disability grant will be revised, contributing both to easier
administration of these restrictions and broader access of the poor to
income support. Details of these reforms will be contained in amendments to
the Social Assistance Act and its regulations, which will soon be tabled by
the Minister of Social Development.

It is proposed that the qualifying age for men for the old age pension
should be reduced from 65 to 63 this year, to 61 in 2009 and to 60 by 2010.
[Applause.] The child support grant will be extended to include children up
to their 15th birthday with effect from January 2009. The Minister of
Social Development has indicated the need to review eligibility criteria or
conditions, in line with practice in many countries, aimed at reinforcing
the responsibilities of caregivers towards benefiting children. These might
include regular school attendance, for example, or immunisation of children
in keeping with health requirements.

There is rightly public interest in these matters, and we should ask this
House to lead an active debate. Social transfers are just part of the war
on poverty, and must be matched by investment in capabilities and
opportunities through skills, economic expansion and development of social
infrastructure.

To fight poverty in a holistic manner, a developmental state must balance
growth in social assistance with progress on other fronts. Our budget
proposals therefore reflect both a balance amongst various spending
measures, and progressive implementation of reforms. Fighting poverty also
requires reliable monitoring and measurement tools. Following public
consultation on the proposals outlined in a discussion document last year,
Statistics South Africa will introduce an official poverty line index in
three weeks time.

Asizukulinda amathonzi abanzi. [We will not wait for more trouble.]

Mr President, I am afraid your members have gone to sleep now. Members of
the House will know that the Division of Revenue Act provides for a
substantial share of nationally collected revenue to go to provinces to
meet the costs of services that are their responsibilities, as set out in
the Constitution. Allocations to provinces will amount to R238 billion in
2008-09. The MECs are all sitting over there and listening. They are
salivating at this number now: R238 billion. The increase over baseline for
the next three years amounts to R46 billion, to provide in particular for
improvements in education, health, welfare and housing programmes. The
equitable share and provincial grants also provide for investment in roads,
agriculture, economic affairs and tourism, including allocations for labour-
intensive programmes falling under the Expanded Public Works Programme.
Improving the quality of services for which responsibility is shared
concurrently between national and provincial government presents particular
challenges. In some instances, provincial budgets do not always reflect
national priorities, while national departments sometimes introduce
priorities that are not well costed. We would like to call on provincial
legislatures and the public to raise their vigilance to ensure that
priorities we hold dearly, especially education and health, are funded
adequately. [Applause.]

I am pleased to be able to report that improved remuneration and training
have contributed to an increase in health personnel of 39 600 over the past
four years, and a further 25 000 posts will be filled by 2010. The hospital
revitalisation programme is targeted for additional allocations, the
conditional grants for HIV and Aids will increase and tertiary health
services are prioritised. Together with additional resources for multidrug
resistant and extreme drug resistant tuberculosis and for higher pay for
nurses, spending on health services is projected to grow by over 10% a year
over the next three years.

I have just gone through a tip that I received from Mr William Makhale from
Moroka North in Soweto. He is a practicing traditional doctor and he has
asked for money to be allocated for traditional health practitioners, and
that the Minister of Health instructs Salga to work with traditional
healers to set up clinics of traditional medicine. Mr Makhale, thank you
for taking the time and effort to write a 99-page submission by hand.
[Applause.] I promise that I will pass this on to my colleague, the
Minister of Health.

Education is central to our objective of broadening opportunity and
fighting poverty. This Budget prioritises school building, early childhood
education, school books and educator remuneration. Over the next three
years, provinces have budgeted to spend over R18 billion on school
infrastructure and equipment, so that we can indeed eradicate unsafe
schools. The expansion of early childhood education to about 600 000 more
children will put basic pre-school education within reach of even the
poorest of households. In addition, the school nutrition programme
increases by over 30% next year so that we can feed more children, in more
schools, more days of the year. [Applause.]

In the present fiscal year which ends on 31 March, education spending in
total exceeded R105 billion, rightly signifying that investing in the
capabilities on which dignity, self-reliance and social progress are built,
is at the centre of our development strategy. And so we have an obligation
to ensure that our democracy is invigorated by schools that are equipped
and furnished, curricula that are right for our times – and in the words of
the January 8th statement of the ANC: Teachers in school, in class, on
time, teaching ... [Applause.] ... no abuse of learners and no neglect of
duty. This is what that statement called the non-negotiables.

Additional allocations are also proposed for higher education and the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme this year, and further education
colleges have been recapitalised.

Under the Deputy President’s leadership we have made considerable progress
over the past two years in identifying priority skills and constructing
innovative partnerships to address these needs. Revenue from the skills
development levy is projected to rise to over R9 billion by 2010-11. I must
repeat that: Revenue from the skills development levy is projected to rise
to over R9 billion by 2010-11. By any measure, this is a substantial amount
of money. It is under the trusteeship of representatives, largely of
organised business and labour and, hon members, we owe it to our young
people and taxpayers to ensure that these funds leverage visible and
lasting improvements in our further education and training programmes and
in economic productivity. [Applause.] Let me admit that government is
exploring ways in which skills levy funds could be used to support FET
colleges.

Turning then to the fight against crime, reinforcing the fight against
crime is both about effective institutions and appropriate mobilisation of
resources. An electronic case-flow management system has now been
implemented in 466 courts, document scanning and digital recording systems
have been introduced and the Justice Department’s financial systems have
been modernised. A major IT and telecommunications upgrade is in progress
in the Police Service and over 1 100 community policing forums have been
established across the country. Additional allocations over the next three
years amount to over R10 billion, including expansion of police numbers to
reach over 200 000 in 2010-11; more prosecutors, judges and magistrates;
further investment in forensic science laboratories; building of 40 police
stations; and construction over the period ahead of 18 000 additional
prison spaces. While acknowledging that there is much to be done to improve
law enforcement and courts administration, the statistics show that
progress is being made and we are mindful of the debt we all owe to those
whose work involves exposure to danger and to heavy caseloads.

In respect of infrastructure investment, in recent years, we have seen
increasingly robust growth in government spending on infrastructure.
Improvements in access to basic household services are tangible signs of
progress in living standards and they broaden opportunities for economic
participation. A total of R17 billion is added to the budgets of the
Departments of Housing, of Provincial and Local Government, of Water
Affairs, of Sport and Recreation and of Transport over the next three
years, primarily to be used for infrastructure. The R6,5 billion added to
the local government equitable share extends further the resources
available for free basic services to poor households. Investments in public
transport, which are made in partnership with our cities, are already
beginning to reshape the urban landscape. Spurred on by their 2010 Fifa
World Cup commitments, our larger cities have begun to modernise public
transport arrangements. These reforms go well beyond the requirements for
2010, and are central to the modernisation and sustainability of our urban
environments. The public transport infrastructure systems grant includes
R11 billion for these programmes over the next three years.

Over the period ahead, Transnet will invest in excess of R78 billion in
infrastructure. About 45% will be spent on improving freight rail
infrastructure and rolling stock. Projects include expanding the coal line
and the iron ore line. To increase port capacity, Transnet is widening and
deepening the entrance to the Durban harbour, building a new container
terminal at Coega, expanding the Cape Town container terminal and buying
new equipment to handle increased volumes. Investments also include the
construction of a liquid fuels pipeline between Durban and Gauteng at a
cost of R11,5 billion.

Over the next five years Eskom’s capital expansion plans will amount to
R343 billion, with about 73% earmarked for power generation projects. The
return-to-service of previously mothballed power stations such as Camden,
Grootvlei and Komati, will add a combined 3 677 MW of generating capacity
by 2011 and other smaller projects will produce about 2 000 MW. Two major
new coal-fired plants, Medupi in Lephalale and Bravo near Witbank, will
each cost in excess of R80 billion and produce about 4 500 MW each. To
improve transmission capacity, Eskom is strengthening the Cape grid, and
building new lines from Majuba to KwaZulu-Natal.

Let me digress from there and express a word of thanks to 244 South
Africans who have sent me advice on options for encouraging energy
efficiency on building standards, subsidising solar powered geysers,
supporting the replacement of incandescent light bulbs or reducing
unnecessary energy use in government offices, in mines and factories, in
ordinary homes. These are issues to which we will return once there has
been time to absorb and assess reform options more fully. There are some
competing perspectives to consider. There have been some appeals for
financial assistance in purchasing electricity generators, for reasons we
all understand. But several correspondents have also pointed out that
subsidising fossil fuel-burning generators would send the wrong signal in
the light of environmental considerations. I mention this to illustrate,
Madam Speaker, that careful thought needs to be given to the fiscal
measures we adopt in response to short-term challenges. We have an
opportunity over the decade ahead to shift the structure of our economy
towards greater energy efficiency, and more responsible use of our natural
resources and relevant resource-based knowledge and expertise. Our economic
growth over the next decade and beyond cannot be built on the same
principles and technologies, the same energy systems and the same transport
modes that we are familiar with today.

Turning to peacekeeping and development in Africa, growth in sub-Saharan
Africa averaged 6,8% in 2007 and is projected to remain above 6% this year.
Our own contributions to peacekeeping efforts, investment promotion and
economic co-operation have gained impetus, and are supported further in the
spending proposals for the period ahead. The Budget also supports our
diplomatic efforts on the continent, as well as in emerging Asia. This
year, provision is made for the construction of the Pan-African Parliament
to be located in Midrand, Gauteng.

After being the recipient of development assistance from many countries
during our transition, South Africa is increasingly becoming a donor in its
own right. Mainly channelled through the African Renaissance Fund, we are
budgeting to spend over R1,3 billion over the next three years to support
development and the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals on our
continent and beyond. [Applause.]

We play a catalytic role in ensuring that developed countries honour their
commitments to stepping up development finance allocations. We have pledged
R272 million to the International Development Association of the World Bank
and the African Development Fund over the next three years. To date, the
Development Bank of Southern Africa has lent over R7 billion to our
continental neighbours.

In October last year, when we tabled the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement, we announced that we had asked departments to identify R2,3
billion in cuts to spending on items that were not core service delivery
activities. Instead of fruit and trees and CDs, hon members, our offering
to Parliament this year is a new, improved version of the Estimates of
National Expenditure, which now includes updated programme objectives and
performance indicators. It is important that you think of this as a
recycled tree and an exceedingly useful one. [Applause.] Although these
will be further refined in years to come, they are already significant
instruments of accountability. Madam Speaker, we ask of you and Parliament
to ensure that every hon member and the public will put these commitments
to the best use possible, to ensure that there is improved accountability
over the commitments that departments may have. [Applause.]

For the next three years noninterest public spending is projected to grow
by 6,1% a year in real terms, after growth of almost 10% a year over the
past five years. Over the next three years, R116 billion is added to the
spending plans tabled a year ago. In addition to higher spending on
services prioritised for key social and development programmes, allocations
include provision for the 2007 Public Service salary agreement and
occupation-specific salary dispensations, in particular for teachers and
health workers. The budget framework also includes an unallocated
contingency reserve of R6 billion in 2008-09 rising to R20 billion in 2010-
11 to provide for unanticipated pressures next year and new priorities in
the years ahead.

Our spending proposals cannot accommodate every request tabled during the
course of the medium-term expenditure planning process, and from time to
time the House will hear rumours of discontent from disappointed policy
advisors or programme planners. This is as it should be, for there will
always be an abundance of ideas that exceeds the bounds of fiscal
responsibility. Part of our job is to ensure that development and social
solidarity investments are reconciled with a sustainable budget framework.

Members of the House will recall that in October last year, in tabling the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, we gave special consideration to the
cyclical benefit that South Africa has enjoyed as a result of high
commodity prices. Buoyant economic growth over the past four years has
partly been the result of the favourable terms of trade – higher prices of
exports relative to imports – and in turn tax revenue has benefited from
the boost to income and profits in the mining sector and related
industries.

We introduced a new measure of the fiscal stance, the cyclically adjusted
budget balance, which takes into account these temporary revenue gains. We
indicated that the moderate budget surplus recorded in the present period
is the correct fiscal response to these circumstances, and that it
represents a strengthening of the state balance sheet in anticipation of
future investment requirements and as protection against financial risks or
deteriorating trade conditions.

The national budget balance – comprising the main budget and social
security funds – is expected to record a surplus of 1% of gross domestic
product this year and an average of 0,7% a year over the next three years.
Government’s net debt is projected to be 16% of GDP by 2011, from 33% three
years ago, and the costs of servicing that debt continue to fall. As I have
noted, this provides protection against the present turbulence in financial
markets, and we can and shall continue to invest in a more productive
economy and expand public service delivery. What this means in practice is
that we will weather the present storm and continue to invest for growth
and development.

Let me turn to the revenue proposals that must accompany our spending
plans. There is again an upward revision in the revenue estimate for the
present financial year, in part because inflation has been higher than we
anticipated. Consolidated national revenue of R580 billion is expected in
2007-08, about R15 billion more than the budget estimate a year ago and
15,7% more than the 2006-07 outcome. Whereas company tax receipts were the
main source of higher revenue last year, it is personal income tax that has
outperformed expectations this year, increasing by nearly 20% year-on-year.

The revenue performance again bears testimony to the extraordinary work of
the South African Revenue Service, and its ongoing administrative capacity
building. The 2007-08 filing season has seen a number of innovations in the
income tax assessment process.

The simplified two-page tax returns and extended taxpayer services were
well received, and together with modern data management have enabled Sars
to provide a better service while at the same time managing risk more
effectively. A record number of tax returns were submitted by the deadline,
including more than 750 000 taxpayers who submitted electronically this
year. In the 2008 financial year, Sars will continue its efforts to reduce
red tape, modernise tax administration and encourage improved tax
compliance. It has commenced the process of enhancing the role of employers
and payroll organisations in the tax assessment process.

The face of customs administration is also changing worldwide. Increasing
international trade requires more visible and effective customs capability
to improve trade facilitation, risk assessment, and border enforcement.
Amendments to the Customs and Excise Act will be introduced to strengthen
customs enforcement and the implementation of the revised Kyoto Convention.
Sars has also stepped up its training efforts to develop skilled customs
professionals who will be deployed in the new Customs Border Control Unit.

Madam Speaker, we have once again been able to draw on an extensive
catalogue of advice from many hundreds of South Africans in compiling this
year’s Budget. The Tips for Trevor we receive from so many citizens and
taxpayers is a sign of democracy at work and tangible evidence of the
creativity and diversity of our people. Advice on tax matters
understandably features prominently.

I was particularly struck by this tip from Mrs Lebo Monyatsi, who writes:

   I am a faithful tither in my church. I am paying 10% of my gross salary
   to the church, which is in compliance to God’s instructions as outlined
   in the book of Malachi 3: verses 8-11.

[Applause.]


   In verse 11 God advises us that when we pay our tithes, He shall rebuke
   the devourer. And surely the taxman is a devourer.


[Applause.]

   I am therefore of the opinion that the tithe constitutes a donation for a
   good cause, that is expanding the kingdom of God, winning lost souls,
   converting criminals from their bad lifestyles and therefore tithers
   should qualify for a tax rebate.

Mrs Monyatsi, I asked my advisors to review the revenue laws to enable me
to respond appropriately, but this was unhelpful. I have therefore taken
advice from another quarter. I found in St Paul’s letter to the Romans,
Chapter 13 confirming that “rulers are not a terror to good works,” and a
corresponding injunction to: “Render therefore to all their dues: tribute
to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to
whom honour.” I hope, Mrs Monyatsi, that you will agree that in this
instance Romans has the advantage, and on that authority allow me to
indicate the tax proposals for the 2008 Budget. [Interjections.]
[Laughter.]

The estimate of main budget revenue before tax proposals for 2008-09 is
R636 billion, taking into account projected economic growth of 4% this
year, inflation of 7%, the buoyant trend in wages and salaries and
continued growth in imports.

The tax proposals for this year provide net relief of R10,5 billion,
bringing the projected main budget revenue to R625 billion, which is 12,1%
more that the 2007-08 revised estimate.

Adjustments to the personal income tax schedules will provide direct relief
of R7,2 billion, fully compensating for the effects of inflation. About one-
third of the benefit goes to those whose taxable income is below R150 000 a
year, and 28% benefits those in the R150 000 to R250 000 income bracket. No
income tax will be payable by those who earn less than R46 000 a year, and
the tax threshold for people over the age of 65 rises to R74 000 a year.
[Applause.]

The monthly monetary caps for tax-free contributions to medical schemes
will rise from R530 to R570 for the first two family members, and from R320
to R345 for each additional beneficiary.

Increases in the tax-free thresholds for interest and dividend income are
proposed, from R18 000 to R19 000 for individuals under the age of 65 and
from R26 000 to R27 000 for those over 65. The annual exclusion threshold
for capital gains or losses will rise from R15 000 to R16 000.

As part of the broader review that is underway of social security and
retirement savings arrangements, a simplified approach to taxing lump-sum
payments on retirement was tabled last year. Similar proposals will be made
for the taxation of other withdrawals from retirement funds, together with
revisions to the various monetary thresholds and percentage contribution
limitations.

Madam Speaker, I have drawn attention to the widening gap between demand
and supply that has accompanied our expansion since 2002 – the gap between
what we spend and what we produce – and to the need to focus economic
policy on supply-side measures that will boost output and job creation. The
higher growth of the past few years, the broader tax base and improved
corporate compliance create the scope for a further reduction in the
corporate tax rate, from 29% to 28%. This will contribute to lowering the
cost of capital for new investment.

Further details are also set out in today’s budget papers of the reform of
the secondary tax on companies announced last year. In effect, this
converts the STC to a tax on shareholders, consistent with international
practice. The rate will remain 10%; the tax will not apply to tax-exempt
entities such as retirement funds and public benefit organisations and all
STC credits will expire when this change is implemented in 2009.

Other tax measures focused on the supply side of the economy include an
extension of learnership allowances for the full duration of
apprenticeships. Employers and public benefit organisations are also
encouraged to contribute to financing education opportunities. The tax-free
fringe benefit threshold for bursaries granted to an employee’s dependants
increases from R3 000 to R10 000 a year, for employees earning less than
R100 000 a year.

The urban development zone incentive will be extended for another five
years to enable the private sector to play its part in developing our inner
cities. The depreciation allowances for employer-provided low-cost housing
will be reviewed, together with the R6 000 deductible limit, with a view to
further encouraging the kind of partnerships between government, the
financial sector, developers and social housing organisations that are
needed for a vibrant, fast-growing and affordable housing sector.

We will also take further steps to reduce the tax compliance burden on
small businesses. This follows the introduction in 2001 of a lower rate
structure, capital gains tax relief and an enhanced depreciation regime for
incorporated small businesses, and in 2005 of relief from the skills
development levy for businesses with a payroll of less than R500 000 a
year.

Khallid Ballim, Katie Schoeman and Altan Zeki have all written to ask for
us to look at the VAT system for small businesses. I am glad to announce to
them and to all of South Africa that the 2008 Budget reduces the
administrative burden on small businesses by introducing a presumptive
turnover tax as an alternative to income tax and VAT for businesses with a
turnover of less than R1 million a year. The threshold for farmers and
businesses who submit VAT returns every six months or four months,
respectively, will be raised from R1,2 million to R1,5 million. The VAT
registration threshold will be raised from an annual turnover of R300 000
to R1 million. [Applause.]

These measures will significantly reduce paperwork for small businesses
while encouraging regular bookkeeping in preparation for migration to the
normal income tax system. We will also support greater access to equity
finance for small and medium-sized enterprises in high-tech sectors and
junior mining exploration companies, in the form of a tax incentive
amounting to a 30% up-front deduction for venture capital investments in
nonmining companies, and a 50% deduction for investments in junior mining
exploration companies, instead of the flow-through share incentive scheme
that we suggested last year.

In respect of excise duties, I need to alert the House, as always, to those
tax increases that are aimed at moderating consumption habits. You see,
when people write to me about Malachi, Shenge, I learn about these things a
bit better. The proposed adjustments to duties on alcoholic beverages will
bring the average tax burden, including VAT, to about 23% of the price of a
bottle of wine, 33% of the price of a beer and 43% on spirits. [Applause.]
Duties on tobacco products are aimed at a total tax burden of 52%. These
tax increases vary between 5 and 11%, broadly in line with inflation. Now I
have a complaint that the Treasury has once again failed to submit a
recommendation in respect of the duty on traditional beer. I intend to seek
advice from certain members of the House on the shades that may be
influencing my officials on this matter. [Laughter.]

Turning to fuel levies, in respect of the general fuel levy, an increase of
6 cents a litre is proposed, which is a 5% increase in the tax on petrol
and 5,7% on diesel. The biodiesel fuel tax concession has been raised from
40% to 50% and bioethanol will remain outside the fuel tax net, but subject
to VAT at the standard rate. The Road Accident Fund levy on petrol and
diesel will be raised again by 5 cents. While this will assist in meeting
the fund’s cash flow requirements, I need to remind the House that there is
still further work to do to implement the Amendment Act passed in 2005 and
to develop the envisaged road accident benefit scheme, so that the burden
on taxpayers of the present unlimited liability arrangement can be brought
to an end.

Supporting sustainable development, there are tax reforms that will take
effect mainly during the 2008-09 year. But I have indicated that we also
have to focus more clearly on our longer term responsibilities. The
Treasury circulated a draft policy paper on environmental fiscal reform to
key stakeholders in 2004, and then published it as a revised discussion
paper in April 2006. Since then, the United Nations International Panel on
Climate Change, in which a South African team led by the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism played an active role, has added impetus
to the need for policy change. Options that will now come under scrutiny
for implementation include the use of emission charges and tradable
permits, tax incentives for cleaner production technologies and reform of
the existing vehicle taxes to encourage fuel efficiency. A proposal to
encourage biodiversity conservation by private landowners through an income
tax deduction is under consideration.

There is much to be done to develop specific and practical measures to
support sustainable development, both on the tax and the spending side of
the Budget. I hope that this House will encourage an energetic debate – if
that is the appropriate word – and we have to work hard at developing an
understanding between very diverse groups of people such as scientists,
environmental activists, engineers, businessmen, workers, policy advisors,
regulators, and every one of us who enjoys the ordinary privilege of having
access to light, heat, cooling, television, transport, communications and
so much else, at the flick of a switch or the press of a button.

As a first step towards appropriately targeted fiscal environmental
measures, and in support of the required demand-side response to power
supply shortages, a new levy will be introduced this year on the sale of
electricity generated from non-renewable sources, at a rate of 2 cents per
kWh. It will be collected at source from the electricity generator, and is
expected to raise about R2 billion in 2008-09 and R4 billion a year
thereafter.

Madam Speaker, we know that the introduction of a new tax is never a
popular move. However, in this House silence means consent. [Laughter.]
This is an instance where we hope that people will succeed in avoiding the
tax – and that is something that Ministers of Finance don’t often say. We
hope that people will be able to avoid paying the tax because households
and businesses who reduce their consumption by 10% or more will find that
this levy does not affect their monthly costs.

At this point, Madam Speaker, let me now clarify the role of the fiscus in
relation to Eskom’s financing requirements. Eskom was initially structured
as a nonprofit utility to be financed entirely by debt. For the first seven
years after it was formed in 1923, it was capitalised by government
advances totalling £8 million, subsequently converted into treasury loans
with terms of up to 40 years. The framework has changed since 2001 – Eskom
is now a corporation owned by the state, and its tariffs are subject to
oversight by an independent regulator. But the underlying principle
throughout Eskom’s history has been that electricity users should bear the
costs of its supply, with capital financed through retained earnings and
debt on market-related terms. Our public expenditure on electrification has
been explicitly targeted at subsidising the extension of supply to low-
income consumers, and not at providing finance for the utility itself. Now
that Eskom once again has a major investment programme to finance, its
capital should again mainly be raised through debt, and paid for by users
over the course of time through appropriately structured tariffs.

However, Eskom’s tariffs were steadily reduced in real terms during the
1980s and 1990s, so that electricity prices in South Africa are now far
lower than in any other comparable country, and well below full economic
cost. In other words, the tariff structure is now too low to support the
required borrowing. Over the next few years, while new power stations are
being built and tariffs are steadily increased and revised to encourage
efficient electricity use, Eskom’s balance sheet will be under some stress.
It is therefore proposed that up to R60 billion should be provided to
support the financing of Eskom’s investment programme, on terms structured
to assist in meeting cash flow requirements. [Applause.]

Madam Speaker, the House should record and the nation needs to know that
this is not a grant. The return on an investment in power generation is
very long term, and the repayment of debt must be similarly deferred. But
we would not be supporting these investments if we were not confident that
they are economically and financially viable.

The amount of R60 billion will be required over the next five years, and we
anticipate that about R20 billion will be drawn over the MTEF period ahead.
This is provided for in the contingency reserve. We are also setting aside
R2 billion over the next three years to support programmes aimed at
encouraging more efficient use of electricity, generation from renewable
sources, installation of electricity-saving devices and co-generation
projects. Intensive work over the next few months is needed to give content
to these proposals, so that allocations for this year can be included in an
Adjustments Appropriation.

Moving from Eskom to exchange control, in keeping with our focus on
structural improvements required for long-run growth, there will be further
steps in exchange control reform this year. The importance of a sound
framework for financial stability has been underscored by the present
turbulence in financial markets, and the direction of our reform is focused
on replacing unnecessary administrative controls with improved surveillance
and prudential limits on foreign exposure risks, as commonly applied
internationally. Exchange controls on institutional investors will be
removed and replaced with a system of prudential regulation, involving
quarterly reporting and monitoring of foreign exposures by the Reserve
Bank.

The foreign exposure limits for institutional investors will be raised and
banks will be permitted to undertake foreign investment within an
appropriate macro-prudential limit. Participation in the rand futures
market on the JSE Securities Exchange will be opened up. Remaining
administrative procedures will be streamlined and simplified. This entails
a substantial shift of functions and responsibilities of the Reserve Bank’s
Exchange Control division, which will be renamed the Financial Surveillance
Department, in line with its new mandate. The President said “All hands on
deck,” and we should say:

Singabemi, urhulumente, abasebenzi nabezoshishino, siyimbumba. [As
citizens, government, labour and business, we stand united.]

I should say it again, “Siyimbumba”. [We are together.] [Applause.] I
should say it again, “Siyimbumba”. [We are together.]

Madam Speaker, the goals and challenges we have discussed, and the
constraints of our present circumstances, confront all of us who share a
stake in the South African economy, as government, as businesses, as
workers, as local communities, as families, as citizens and taxpayers. We
are in this together, as President Mbeki has put it, “All hands on deck”,
through the financial storm if it visits our shores, through the
construction of better schools and skills programmes, through building
clinics and social security reforms, through our infrastructure investments
and adjusting to an environmentally responsible future, through our fight
against crime, through our war on poverty. We are in this together.

That we have to work together to overcome obstacles and achieve our
ambitions is self-evident. That there is hard work ahead is equally clear.
I would also wish to affirm that there is a place in this shared future for
all of us – we are building an economy in which businesses can grow and
prosper, in which productive work will be rewarded, in which community
organisations have a place alongside government in delivering public
services, in which there is respect and recognition of the skills, the
talents, the diversity, the commonality that South Africans have in
abundance. United in our diversity, with social solidarity as our rallying
cry, we will work together to build a prosperous nonracial, nonsexist,
democratic South Africa.

Honourable members, I have already mentioned a number of concrete steps
that this Budget takes to ensure that we as a country contribute to
protecting our environment. In the interests of full disclosure of the
relevant facts, I need to share with the House also the costs to the
environment of the Budget documents that we produce. Our estimate is that
since the beginning of this year up to the tabling of this Budget – and I
should hide now- the National Treasury’s work has caused 38 000 kg of
carbon dioxide emissions. We have used over 37 tons of paper, the
equivalent of 726 trees. I am pleased to report that the Budget documents
are printed on a paper called Triple Green, which is chlorine free and
biodegradable, comprises of 60% sugar cane fibre and meets the standard of
sustainable forestation. [Applause.] This is a start and I’ll submit that
it is not a bad start, but we need to do more. The Director-General of the
Treasury has therefore pledged to continue to measure and reduce our
environmental footprint in future budgets. We call on other government
departments to take up the same challenge. [Applause.]

Let me conclude, Madam Speaker. Each budget that we have presented to this
House over the past 14 years has been distinctly different from its
antecedents. The important shift this year is that the global economy is so
very different – and as with weather and disease, economic trends do not
stop at border posts. They carry no passports, yet they have the potential
to wreak havoc, even when plans have been carefully laid.

Madam Speaker, to synthesise a budget that will stand up to scrutiny
requires an ability to take advice from many quarters, to analyse and test
this, to vary where required and to disagree with proposals where
circumstances demand. This faculty is in the National Treasury, which
exists as a department in the service of other departments. Amongst the
sources of ideas is the broader public, active and engaged with the process
and taking ownership of the Budget. This year, 2 240 of our compatriots
shared their ideas with us and I assure you that I have read them all. To
all who have taken the time to write in, we say a very big thank you. I
have alluded to some of these ideas, frequently focused on a specific issue
or two. Occasionally, there are ideas that are more far-reaching – one such
proposal came from Mr Jim McNamara – who writes, “our citizens would have
greater confidence in their futures if South Africa is seen to have an
‘escalator economy’ rather than an ‘elevator economy’. He draws this
observation from watching crowd behaviour. For an elevator or lift, the
crowds jostle, the strong force their way through and the infirm are left
behind; whereas with an escalator, there is a steady upward movement for
everybody. So yes, Mr McNamara speaks directly to the social content of our
constitutional imperative. I am glad that he was able to join us. He is in
the gallery with us today. [Applause.]

After having considered all of these proposals, it is important to restate
that I am privileged to present this Budget as a statement of collective
Cabinet responsibility. Achieving this requires leadership and attention to
detail – President Thabo Mbeki, ably supported by Deputy President Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, provides the required leadership in abundant measure. They
offer a listening post and shoulder to aggrieved colleagues and, most
importantly, ensure that we have the consensus on time and in Budget.
[Applause.] Thank you very much to them.

We have a group of allies, and sometimes we are combatants, who give so
much of their time and energy to the detail of the Budget. They do this way
beyond their line function responsibilities. These are the members of the
Ministers Committee on the Budget, who deserve our collective appreciation.
[Applause.]

Deputy Minister Jabu Moleketi continues to provide sharp analysis and a
range of insights to the process; he also deserves our immense
appreciation. [Applause.] I have already alluded to the presence in the
House of the MECs for Finance. They have been melded into a team of tough
negotiators. As I indicated earlier, they have squeezed out R238 billion
for the provinces for the next fiscal year. On behalf of everybody who
depends on public services, we should say thank you to them and ask, as we
did earlier, that provincial legislatures be vigilant about the priorities
funded. [Applause.]

Our collective appreciation should also be extended to Governor Tito
Mboweni and his team at the Reserve Bank, who have faced a challenging year
in the context of the global economy. It may take some time to appreciate
the value of Governor Mboweni’s firm hand on monetary policy, but I have no
doubt that his worth will soon become apparent in the numbers, and his
firmness applauded. His presence here today is very special. I want to
thank him for his presence here today. [Applause.]

Statistician General Pali Lehohla and his team at Stats SA, and the Chair
of the Statistics Council, Mr Howard Gabriels, have served us immensely and
will continue to do so. We have indicated that in three weeks South Africa
should expect a poverty measure out of Stats SA. The Financial and Fiscal
Commission and its chairperson, Dr Bethuel Setai, are thanked for the
quality of their advice. I should make special mention of the long-serving
Deputy Chair of the FFC, Mr Jaya Josie, who has just retired from the FFC
after having served diligently since its inception. [Applause.] Nedlac, and
its CEO Mr Herbert Mkhize, serves the fiscal cause so well by continuing to
steer the interactions between the various social partners. Our
appreciation also goes to hon Nhlanhla Nene and hon Tutu Ralane who chair
the Portfolio and Select Committees on Finance respectively and to the
joint chairs of the Budget committee, hon Louisa Mabe and hon Buti
Mkhalipi. [Applause.]

Madam Speaker, on 1 March, Mr Pravin Gordhan will mark his 10th anniversary
as Commissioner for Sars. He can look back over the period with immense
pride. [Applause.] During his term, the revenue take has grown from R184
billion to R558 billion. [Applause.] We, who are not of Sars, can similarly
look at the period with admiration and an immense appreciation for his
leadership and diligence. But more importantly, as Members of Parliament we
can actually say: He is one of us, deployed elsewhere for now.

I have earlier spoken of the National Treasury as the department in the
service of other departments – this is an unbelievably difficult task
managed and led with aplomb by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, a true gift to the
Public Service who continues to bring out the sparkle in all of his team.
[Applause.] Soon they will be wearing ties like Lesetja’s. His efforts we
warmly applaud.

The staff in the Ministry is a wonderful group of people who give more than
what is requested of them – to all of them a huge thank you. Finally, to my
long-suffering family – Maria, the boys, my mom, my sisters and oupa -
thank you very much.

And then, to all of you, listening and engaged, thank you so very much for
your patience and forbearance. We take no part of it for granted. Perhaps I
should single out one individual who might be sitting in that bench,
listening to a Budget speech for the last time. Next week he is going to do
gardening or something: Kader Asmal – friend, colleague, landlord for a
long period of time; thank you very much. [Applause.]

Before I again run into trouble as I did last year, I table before this
House today the Budget Speech 2008, the Estimates of National Revenue; the
Taxation Proposals; the Rates of Normal Tax and Rebates; the Budget Review
2008, including the Taxation Proposals in respect of Customs and Excise
Duties; the Appropriation Bill; the Division of Revenue Bill; and the
Estimates of National Expenditure 2008. I didn’t forget this year. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The House adjourned at 15:22.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on 18 February 2008 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Cross-Border Road Transport Amendment Bill [B 51 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Appropriation Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister of Finance.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance.

      2) Division of Revenue Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the
         Select Committee on Finance.

3.    Introduction of Bills


     1.     The Minister of Finance


         (a)     Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2008] (National Assembly –
              proposed sec 77)

        b) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2008] (National Assembly –
           proposed sec 76)


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly for consideration and report and to the
         Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its mandate, as
         well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance – 20 February 2008 [RP
         03-2008].


      b) Estimates of National Revenue for 2008 [RP 04-2008].


      c) Taxation Proposals: Rates of Normal Tax and Rebates.

      d) Budget Review 2008 [RP 02-2008], including:

            Taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise duties.

      e) Appropriation Bill [B 3 - 2008].


      f) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 - 2008], tabled in terms of section
         10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No
         97 of 1997).

      g) Estimates of National Expenditure 2008 [RP 01-2008], which
         includes:


           1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Main Estimates,
              2008-2009;


          2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates, 2008-
             2009;


           3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2008-2009;


           4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2008-2009;


           5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Public Works", Main Estimates,
              2008-2009;
          6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Government Communications and
             Information System", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


           7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         8.      Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Service and
              Administration", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         9.      Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service Commission",
              Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         10.     Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "South African Management
              Development Institute", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         11.     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         12.     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Arts and Culture", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         13.     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Education", Main Estimates,
              2008-2009;


         14.     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2008-
              2009;


         15.     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2008-
              2009;


         16.     Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Social Development", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         17.     Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Sport and Recreation South
              Africa", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         18.     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Correctional Services", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         19.     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2008-
              2009;


         20.     Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Independent Complaints
              Directorate", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         21.     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Justice and Constitutional
              Development", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         22.     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Safety and Security”, Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         23.     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,
              2008-2009;


         24.     Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Communications", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         25.     Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         26.     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2008-
              2009;


         27.     Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2008-2009;
         28.     Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Minerals and Energy", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         29.     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Provincial and Local
              Government", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         30.     Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Enterprises", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         31.     Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         32.     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main
              Estimates, 2008-2009;


         33.     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Main Estimates,
              2008-2009;


         34.     Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
              Main Estimates, 2008-2009.


    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
    report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
    Standards Bill [B 46 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 20
    February 2008:
      The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered the
        subject of the Standards Bill [B 46 - 2007] (National Assembly –
        sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
        Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B
        46A – 2007].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
    National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill [B 47 - 2007]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 20 February 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered the
         subject of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications
         Bill [B 47 - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         reports the Bill with amendments [B 47A – 2007].


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the International
    Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling Systems on Ships,
    dated 20 February 2008:


         The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the International Convention on the
         Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling Systems on Ships, referred to it,
         recommends that the House, in terms of Section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Convention.


      Request to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the 1991 Amendments
    to the Convention on the International Maritime Organisation (IMO),
    1948, dated 20 February 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the 1991 Amendments to the Convention
         on the International Maritime Organisation (IMO), 1948, referred to
         it, recommends that the House, in terms of Section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Convention.


      Request to be considered.


