---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - MONDAY 20 JANUARY 1930'
layout: debate
year: 1930
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 20th JANUARY, 1930.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1930-01-20T14:21:00">2.21 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#public_auctions_and_transactions_in_livestock_and_produce_(amendment)_bill">

<heading>PUBLIC AUCTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS IN LIVESTOCK AND PRODUCE (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Agriculture to introduce the Public Auctions and Transactions in Livestock and Produce (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

<p>On the motion that the Bill be read a second time on 22nd January,</p>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister kindly to give a little more time before taking the second reading. We only found the Bill in our pigeon holes yesterday. The countryside is not acquainted with the details and of course it affects a large number of country business people who are not aware of the proposals.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>The Bill was published some time ago, and if hon. members had given attention to it, they would not ask for a further postponement. Moreover, we know that the House at the start has little to do, and we should like to dispose of as much as possible in the beginning. If hon. members do not know by Wednesday what is in the Bill, we shall be able to postpone the second reading.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#agricultural_products_packing_and_marking_bill">

<heading>AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS PACKING AND MARKING BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Agriculture to introduce the Agricultural Products Packing and Marking Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

<p>On the motion that the Bill be read a second time on 22nd January,</p>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>Here I make a similar appeal that consideration of this Bill be postponed. I have looked through the Bill, in which the Minister takes absolute control of every class of the farmers&#x2019; produce, which the farmer has to sell according to the regulations made by the Minister. I am afraid that a large number of our agricultural societies and farmers&#x2019; organizations and corporations are entirely unaware of the drastic proposals contained in the proposed law. I think the Minister would do well to notify the country about this Bill and postpone consideration of it so that we can communicate with our societies and send copies of this Bill to them so that they can express their opinion before the Minister goes on with the second reading. I am not raising opposition to the principle of the Bill provided our friends of the agricultural societies are satisfied with <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0074"/>it, but we ought to give more careful scrutiny to the wide powers contained in the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>The various farmers&#x2019; organizations have been consulted, but as the representatives of the farmers opposite think so slowly, I shall postpone the second reading till next Monday.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#gilson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GILSON</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to add a word to what my hon. friend the member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) has said. The Minister has not given one word of explanation of his attempt to introduce these powers, and if he will say he will confine it to packages and boxes for export he will have the support of everybody, but it is going too far to say to the farmers how they should pack and put any produce on the local markets. The Minister of Finance would not dare to bring up a similar Bill to be applied to our commercial friends. If the principle is good for one it might apply to everybody.</p>

<p>Second reading on 27th January.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#coloured_persons_settlement_areas_(cape)_bill">

<heading>COLOURED PERSONS SETTLEMENT AREAS (CAPE) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Lands to introduce the Coloured Persons Settlement Areas (Cape) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought un and read a first time: second reading on 23rd January.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#south_west_africa_railways_and_harbours_(amendment)_bill">

<heading>SOUTH WEST AFRICA RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Railways and Harbours to introduce the South West Africa Railways and Harbours (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 22nd January.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#milnerton_railway_(junction_alteration)_bill">

<heading>MILNERTON RAILWAY (JUNCTION ALTERATION) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Railways and Harbours to introduce the Milnerton Railway (Junction Alteration) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 22nd January.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#s.c._on_internal_arrangements">

<heading>S.C. ON INTERNAL ARRANGEMENTS.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE (for the Minister of Public Works)</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee be appointed on Internal Arrangements, the Committee to have power to confer with a similar Committee of the Senate.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#s.c._ox_library_of_parliament">

<heading>S.C. OX LIBRARY OF PARLIAMENT.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE (for the Minister of Education)</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee be appointed on the management and superintendence of the Library of Parliament, the Committee to have power to confer with a similar Committee of the Senate.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#s.c._on_public_accounts">

<heading>S.C. ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee on Public Accounts be appointed, the Committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. L. MALAN</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#s.c._on_railways_and_harbours">

<heading>S.C. ON RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee on Railways and H arbours be appointed, the Committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#s.c._on_pensions_grants_and_gratuities">

<heading>S.C. ON PENSIONS, GRANTS AND GRATUITIES.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee be appointed to consider and report upon all minutes recommending special pensions and all petitions for pensions, grants and gratuities not authorized by law which may from time to time be referred to it, the Committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRETORIUS</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1930-01-20T14:50:00">2.50 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

