---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - FRIDAY 24 JANUARY 1930'
layout: debate
year: 1930
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 24th JANUARY, 1930.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1930-01-24T14:21:00">2.21 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read a letter from the secretary to the Prime Minister, dated the 24th January, 1930, reporting the election of the following members for the representation of the electoral divisions stated, viz.:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Joseph Petrus Jooste, for the electoral division of Bethal, in the room of the hon. T. J. de Y. Roos, resigned.</li>

<li>(2) Wilhelm Bruckner de Villiers, for the electoral division of Stellenbosch to fill the vacancy created by his resignation on the 30th October, 1929.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#affirmation_of_allegiance">

<heading>AFFIRMATION OF ALLEGIANCE.</heading>

<p>Mr. W. B. de Villiers, introduced by the Minister of Mines and Industries and Mr. Sauer, made and subscribed to the affirmation and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#s.c._members_appointed">

<heading>S.C. MEMBERS APPOINTED.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders had appointed the following members to serve on the Select Committees mentioned, viz.:</p>

<p>Internal Arrangements.&#x2014;Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Public Works, Messrs. Kayser, M. L. Malan, Struben, Stuttaford and Vermooten.</p>

<p><span class="col_69-70" refersTo="page_0103"/>Library of Parliament.&#x2014;Mr. Speaker, Sir Robert Kotz&#x00E9;, Messrs. McMenamin, O&#x2019;Brien, Robinson, Dr. Stals, and Dr. N. J. van der Merwe.</p>

<p>Public Accounts.&#x2014;The Minister of Finance, Messrs. Anderson, Blackwell, Dr. Conradie, Messrs. Gilson, Hofmeyr, le Roux, Munnik, Tom Naud&#x00E9;, Pocock, Shaw, Steyn, Strydom, Sturrock, Stuttaford and Visser.</p>

<p>Railways and Harbours.&#x2014;The Minister of Railways and Harbours, Messrs. Basson, Bates, Brown, Deane, Giovanetti, Haywood, Dr. Lamprecht, Messrs. Lawrence, Pienaar. Maj. Richards, Maj. K. Rood, Col. Stallard, Dr. Stals, Mr. Swart and Maj. G. B. van Zyl.</p>

<p>Native Affairs.&#x2014;The Minister of Native Affairs, Brig.-Gen. Byron, Messrs. Conroy, Marwick, Payn, Rockey, Sauer, Sephton, Steytler, Lt.-Col. Terreblanche and Dr. van Broekhuizen.</p>

<p>Crown Lands.&#x2014;The Minister of Lands, Messrs. Bekker, Bergh, Faure, Hockly, M. L. Malan, Nicholls, Col. D. Reitz, Messrs, van Coller, Vorster and Wentzel.</p>

<p>Pensions, Grants and Gratuities.&#x2014;Messrs. Borlase, Bowen, Bowie, Brits, Cilliers, S. D. de Wet, P. P. du Toit, Eaton, McMenamin, van Rensburg and Col. Wares.</p>

<p>Irrigation Matters.&#x2014;The Minister of Native Affairs, Messrs. Abrahamson, Baines Humphreys, Nel, Robertson, Roux, R. A. T. van der Merwe and Vosloo.</p>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask in view of its experience of being independent of labour in Bethal whether some consideration will be given by the Government for the representation of the Labour Party on the select committees.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>This matter cannot be discussed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I am asking a question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry, I cannot allow this now.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#committee_on_standing_rules_and_orders">

<heading>COMMITTEE ON STANDING RULES AND ORDERS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER, as chairman, brought up the first report of the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders, as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The Committee on Standing Rules and Orders, having considered the message from the Hon. the Senate, dated the 21st January, 1930, referred to it, begs to recommend that the Minister of Public Works, Mr. Faure and Mr. Vermooten be appointed a Committee, two to form a quorum, to join with the Committee already appointed by the Hon. the Senate for the purpose of the superintendence and management of the Parliamentary catering.</block>

<p>Report considered and adopted and following message sent to the Senate&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The House of Assembly concurs in the request contained in the message from the Hon. the Senate, dated the 21st January, 1930, and has appointed a Committee of three members, the Minister of Public Works, Mr. Faure and Mr. Vermooten, to join with a Committee consisting of an equal number of members appointed by the Hon. the Senate as a Joint Sessional Committee for the purpose of the superintendence and management of Parliamentary catering.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#university_of_pretoria_(private)_bill">

<heading>UNIVERSITY OF PRETORIA (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER, as chairman, brought up the second report of the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders, as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The Committee on Standing Rules and Orders begs to report that it has considered the Report of the Examiners on the petition for leave to introduce the University of Pretoria (Private) Bill, referred to it on the 22nd January, 1930, and recommends that, notwithstanding the non-compliance with the Standing Orders relating to Private Bills, Indulgence be granted and that the Bill be allowed to proceed, subject to the condition that any person who may be desirous of being heard against the Bill to oppose the same by way of petition at any time during the progress of the Bill in this House, and provided that if necessary the select committee to which the Bill is referred after first reading may be revived for the purpose of considering such petition.</block>

<p>Report considered and adopted.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Cancer and Radium.</heading>

<question by="#humphreys" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. HUMPHREYS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Health:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the death rate from cancer in the Union has increased during the past eighteen years, and, if so, to what extent;</li>

<li>(2) whether radium is considered to be a cure for cancer in the initial stages of the disease;</li>

<li>(3) whether radium will assist to avoid distress and suffering in the advanced stages of the disease;</li>

<li>(4) whether the chief Health Officer of the Union or any competent committee of enquiry has expressed opinions on the curative properties of radium, and, if so, what were those opinions;</li>

<li>(5) whether the Minister is prepared to recommend a contribution by the Union Government of the sum of &#x00A3;50,000, or any other sum, for the purpose of the purchase of radium; and</li>

<li>(6) whether the Minister is prepared to organize and support a public appeal for a similar sum in order to provide the large hospitals of the Union with an adequate supply of radium</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#humphreys">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<ol>

<li><span class="col_71-72" refersTo="page_0104"/>(1) Yes. The cancer death-rate of the European population of the Union has steadily increased during recent years, though part of the increase is doubtless accounted for by improved methods of diagnosis, better registration of deaths and their causes and change in the age distribution of the population. The rate is usually given as the number of deaths from cancer during the year per 100,000 of the European population. From 1912 to 1920 the figures were kept for medically certified deaths only and the rate increased from 46.5 in 1912 to 58.8 in 1920. From 1921 to 1928 the rate calculated on all deaths registered as due to cancer increased from 69.1 in 1921 to 77.5 in 1928. During the same period the ratio of cancer deaths to total deaths registered increased correspondingly.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) Radium treatment is valuable and effective in many cases of cancer in the earlier stages; it sometimes effects a cure in cases unsuitable for operation or past the operative stage, and is very useful in alleviating pain and other symptoms in advanced cases of the disease.</li>

<li>(4) During recent years favourable opinions on the curative value of radium treatment have been expressed by various competent bodies of experts in other countries. The views and recommendations of the Chief Health Officer for the Union on the subject will be found in the Department&#x2019;s last Annual Report which has already been distributed to members.</li>

<li>(5) The provision of supplies of radium for use in connection with hospitals in the Union is a matter for the Provincial Administrations and hospital boards.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Lucerne.</heading>

<question by="#vosloo" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. VOSLOO</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, in view of the Minister&#x2019;s letter to the Sundays River Lucerne Corporation, dated the 8th August, 1929, the Division of Markets and Economics has instituted an enquiry as to the possibility of finding a market for lucerne both overseas and in the Union in order to relieve and improve the position of lucerne-growers; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) what is the result of that enquiry &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#vosloo">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>(1) and (2) This enquiry is proceeding. Results so far as overseas markets are concerned have already been published; so far as the Union is concerned results will be published when complete.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Wool, Price of.</heading>

<question by="#van_coller" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. VAN COLLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Government has enquired into the causes of the sudden and unprecedented fall in the price of wool, and, if so, with what result;</li>

<li>(2) whether the enquiry included the disparity in price between the raw product and the finished article, and, if not, whether the Government will institute such an enquiry;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government is aware of any organization or movement amongst overseas buyers of wool to deflate the prices of wool; and</li>

<li>(4) what action the Government intends taking to improve the conditions of the wool-growing industry&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#van_coller">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Presumably the hon. member refers to the stagnation which has ensued since the beginning of the year. The cause of the local fall is undoubtedly due to oversea buyers ceasing temporarily to operate actively in the local market, the reason for which is stated to be due to financial stringency affecting manufacturing interests overseas. No specific enquiry has been made but the department is investigating the matter carefully.</li>

<li>(2) No, it is difficult to see how an enquiry could be made by this Government into manufacturing conditions in the various countries overseas which purchase our wool. Attempts to do so in regard to mohair yielded most unsatisfactory results.</li>

<li>(3) I have no information on this point. The Government is giving the existing situation its serious consideration.</li>

<li>(4) As the hon. member is aware a levy has recently been imposed upon wool exported with the object of enabling producers to co-operate financially with the Government in its effort to improve conditions and prospects of the wool-growing industry. This step has been taken at the request of the wool growers with the full support of the interests concerned. A Board of Control will shortly be appointed which will advise me in regard to the expenditure of these funds to the best advantage. It is unnecessary to recapitulate the various measures which have been taken by the Government in the past for the amelioration of the conditions of the wool industry, which are well known to all concerned.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us what particular measures he had in mind when yesterday, or the day before, he told the Press that the wool farmers need not despair&#x2014; he was tackling the problem personally &#x003F;</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Deaf and Dumb Training.</heading>

<question by="#van_coller" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. VAN COLLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many inmates (deaf and dumb) are being trained and educated at the Worcester Institute;</li>

<li>(2) apart from the above institution, are there any other institutions in the Union for the training of the deaf and dumb; and</li>

<li>(3) whether any representations have been made to the Government for further similar institutions: and, if so, with what result &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from><span class="col_73-74" refersTo="page_0105"/>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 151.</li>

<li>(2) (a) The Grimley Institute for the Deaf, Tuin Plein, Cape Town; which comprises separate divisions for Europeans and non-Europeans. (b) The convent of the Sacred Heart Deaf School at Kingwilliamstown. (c) The School for the Deaf, Hancock Street, Johannesburg. (a) and (b) are State-aided institutions, (c) is a private (non-State-aided) school conducted by the Transvaal Association for the Deaf.</li>

<li>(3) Representations have been made to the Union Education Department for the establishment of a school for the deaf in Natal and for State aid to the institution mentioned under (2) (c). In view of the very scattered nature of the deaf and dumb population and the relatively high cost of this type of education, a policy of centralizing deaf and dumb pupils in a few institutions is being followed. The available figures regarding the number of deaf and dumb children in the Union cannot be regarded as sufficiently reliable and the Union Education Department through the recently constituted National Council for the Deaf and the Provincial Education Departments is collecting fuller data regarding this question. When this information is available it will be possible to consider the question whether adequate provision is being made for the education of the deaf and dumb.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Soil Erosion.</heading>

<question by="#van_coller" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. VAN COLLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any survey has been made of the extent of the soil erosion existent in the Union, and, if so, what is the extent thereof;</li>

<li>(2) whether he will lay upon the Table of the House the resolutions passed at the conference held in Pretoria in November last;</li>

<li>(3) whether he intends introducing any legislation compelling owners of landed property to report the existence of soil erosion on their properties; and</li>

<li>(4) what action is being taken by the Government to combat the ravages of soil erosion &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#van_coller">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I will lay upon the Table the resolutions in question. The other matters referred to in the question will form the subject of discussion after the proposed advisory council has been constituted and the action to be taken will depend largely upon that body&#x2019;s recommendations.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Natives and Obscene Prints.</heading>

<question by="#van_coller" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. VAN COLLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to the comments of the Judge-President of the Eastern Districts Court in the case of Rex. vs. Miriam Mgadlela, charged in October, 1929, with sending an obscene postcard to a European prisoner named Drayton;</li>

<li>(2) whether any steps have been taken to ascertain how and from whom the said native woman acquired the obscene postcard, and, if so, with what result;</li>

<li>(3) what steps are being taken to prevent the circulation of obscene books, prints, pamphlets and postcards amongst the natives; and</li>

<li>(4) how many convictions were there during the year ended the 31st December, 1929, of the Provisions of Act No. 5 of 1927 of (a) Europeans and (b) natives, and what was the sentence in each case &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#van_coller">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes; Miriam Mgadlela was convicted at East London on the 26th November, 1929, for contravening Section 96 (e) Act 10 of 1911 and fined &#x00A3;25 or three months&#x2019; imprisonment with hard labour.</li>

<li>(2) On information obtained from her a search warrant was executed against a general dealer in East London but without result. Her statement was contradicted by a witness mentioned as being present when the obscene post card was given to her. No proceedings followed.</li>

<li>(3) The police have special instructions to keep a sharp look-out for any obscene publications in circulation and to take the necessary action when such are discovered.</li>

<li>(4) A return will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Free Pass, Forgery in.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether in August, 1928, a European labourer, who was issued a free railway pass from Maritzburg to Ladysmith (Natal), altered the pass to read Ladismith (Cape) and proceeded to travel to the latter centre under the falsified pass;</li>

<li>(2) whether the labourer in question, when the deception was detected, acknowledged his civil liability for the rail fare and made a payment on account thereof;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister gave instructions that the balance should be waived; if so,</li>

<li>(4) whether any representations were made to the Minister which influenced him to issue such instructions; if so, by whom and of what nature were such representations; and, if not, what were his reasons for waiving the claim;</li>

<li>(5) whether no criminal prosecution was instituted or complaint lodged with a view to a prosecution; and, if not, why not; and</li>

<li>(6) whether the Minister will lay the papers upon the Table &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1), (2) and (3) Yes.</li>

<li><span class="col_75-76" refersTo="page_0106"/>(4) Representations were made to me by the European labourer concerned, a youth of 18&#x00BD; years, for release from payment of the balance due or for the detriment of payment of instalments until after the harvest or until other work had been secured. In view of the youth&#x2019;s destitute condition, I agreed to the balance of &#x00A3;8 19s. 0d. being waived.</li>

<li>(5) No steps were taken to prosecute the youth. His age, and the fact that he was out of work and in straitened circumstances, influenced me in deciding not to institute criminal proceedings, apart from the further fact that normally an employee leaving the service may obtain a pass to the point of his engagement.</li>

<li>(6) No; but the hon. member, if he wishes to do so, may peruse the papers in my office.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>I would like to know whether the Minister himself gave instructions that no criminal prosecution should result.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I did not give any instructions. All, I did was not to make any charge to the police.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>I should like to ask the hon. the Minister why he extended clemency in this case when it is the invariable practice to prosecute persons found to be travelling without a ticket.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Because the circumstances warranted me in the action I took.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#bowie" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. BOWIE:</from>

<p>I ask the hon. the Minister whether that person is still in the employment of the Railways and Harbours Administration&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#bowie">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>He falsified the ticket, and he is no longer in the service of the Railways and Harbours Administration.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us how the case was brought to his notice, and how he came to receive personal representations on the matter from a person who had defrauded the Government &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I am always willing to receive representations from any person on a matter of public interest. As I have already indicated, the papers are available for any hon. member who wishes to see them.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Water for Drinking.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) From what source or sources is the drinking water which is made available for consumption by passengers on the South African Railways obtained;</li>

<li>(2) what precautions, if any, are taken to ensure that the water in question is fit for human consumption;</li>

<li>(3) what is the system adopted to ensure that the water bottles and other receptacles used are kept clean and the water renewed at regular intervals, and how often is this done;</li>

<li>(4) whether any cases of serious illness following on the drinking of such water have been brought to the notice of the Administration &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Municipal and departmental sources, the latter represented by wells, boreholes, dams or river supplies.</li>

<li>(2) The water is tested by special analysis. In addition, an officer of the department has been specially deputed to take, direct from the sources from which obtained, samples of the drinking water supplied to trains, and these are submitted to the Government pathologist attached to the Public Health Department. I would mention that, as a result of the precautions taken by the Administration, the water obtained at a certain place was found to be unsuitable for human consumption without treatment, and instructions have been issued for all water to be boiled before use.</li>

<li>(3) Water bottles and other receptacles are removed from carriages, thoroughly cleansed and the water renewed on completion of every long-distance journey. This is done under special supervision. Where necessary, water supplies are replenished at specified stations en route.</li>

<li>(4) No.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Accidents at Level Crossings.</heading>

<question by="#friend" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. FRIEND (for Mr. Lawrence)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the total number of level crossing accidents which occurred in the Union during 1929;</li>

<li>(2) how many persons were (a) killed and (b) injured in such accidents;</li>

<li>(3) how many such accidents have occurred in the Cape Peninsula since the electrification of the railways; and</li>

<li>(4) whether it is his intention to carry out the provisions of the Level Crossings Commission by eliminating existing level crossings in the Peninsula and substituting other and safer means&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#friend">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 186.</li>

<li>(2) (a) 34, (b) 30.</li>

<li>(3) 19.</li>

<li>(4) Yes, provided the local authorities will bear half the expenditure involved.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Maternity, Mortality in.</heading>

<question by="#steenkamp" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Dr. STEENKAMP</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Health:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether South Africa&#x2019;s maternal mortality figures are among the highest in <span class="col_77-78" refersTo="page_0107"/>the world, ranking, with 4.98 per 1,000, second only to Japan with 3 per 1,000;</li>

<li>(2) whether the figures increased from 4.7 in 1924 to 4.35 in 1927 and to 4.98 in 1928; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government is prepared to appoint a commission to investigate this matter, with a view eventually to remedying existing conditions connected with care before, during and after labour by State control&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#steenkamp">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The maternal mortality rate for Europeans in the Union&#x2014;that is, the number of deaths of mothers in connection with pregnancy or childbirth per 1,000 live births registered&#x2014;is certainly unduly high, though it is exceeded in several other countries.</li>

<li>(2) The rate has hitherto been consistently high, varying during the eight years 1921 to 1928 inclusive from 4.56 to 5.22, or an average of 5 per 1,000.</li>

<li>(3) The matter is at present receiving the careful consideration of the department in consultation with the Provincial Administrations and various interested organizations. The main causes of the high rate, namely, the inadequacy of medical and trained midwifery nursing facilities for the people in rural areas and for many of the poorer classes in urban areas, and the employment of untrained and often ignorant persons to attend confinements, are well known, and it seems doubtful whether a commission is called for.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#borlase" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>Mr. BORLASE:</from>

<p>I would ask the hon. the Minister if it is the fact that where qualified nurses are not obtainable in this country, they may not be brought in from overseas.</p>

</question>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>May I ask the hon. the Minister whether he is dealing with certificated cases only, or with cases of all registered deaths.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#borlase">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<p>Yes, with all registered deaths.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Police at Salt River.</heading>

<question by="#roper" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. ROPER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is proposed to reduce certain plain clothes constables of the railway police at Salt River Works to the position of watchmen;</li>

<li>(2) whether such a reduction involves any loss of pay or diminution of prospects of promotion;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Governor-General&#x2019;s consent has been obtained to this course;</li>

<li>(4) whether a similar course is proposed to be adopted at any other railway centre in the Union; and</li>

<li>(5) whether he will lay upon the Table of the House a return showing (a) the number of men of the docks police and railway police respectively employed in the Table Bay docks area as on the 31st March, 1928; (b) the total number of men employed in the same area on the same duties at the present time; (c) the strength of the railway police in the Cape Peninsula (excluding the docks area) as on the 31st March, 1928; (d) the corresponding strength at the present time; (e) the total strength of the railway police of the Union for each of the last five years; and (f) the sums paid out for losses by theft or pilferage during each of the last five years &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#roper">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The proposal is merely that, in future, a plain clothes constable employed on watchman&#x2019;s duties will be called a &#x201C;watchman.&#x201D;</li>

<li>(2) No.</li>

<li>(3) Falls away.</li>

<li>(4) Yes.</li>

<li>(5) I lay upon the Table a statement detailing the particulars desired.</li>

</ol>

<p><i>The following is the statement:</i></p>

<ol>

<li>(a) Number of men employed in the Table Bay docks area as on 31st March, 1928: Docks police, 25; Railway police, 13.</li>

<li>(b) Total number of men employed in the Table Bay docks area at the present time: Docks. police (water police and charge office duties), 9: Railway police, 19.</li>

<li>(c) Strength of the railway police in the Cape Peninsula (excluding the docks area) as on the 31st March, 1928: Number, 56.</li>

<li>(d) Strength of the railway police in the Cape Peninsula (excluding the docks area) at the present time; Number, 45.</li>

<li>(e) Total strength of the railway police of the Union for each of the last five years: Europeans&#x2014;1925, 325; 1926, 341; 1927, 347; 1928, 337: 1929, 323. Non-Europeans&#x2014;1925, 221; 1926, 220; 1927, 222; 1928, 206; 1929, 196.</li>

<li>(i) Sums paid out for losses by theft or pilferage during each of the last five years: 1925, &#x00A3;3,349; 1926, &#x00A3;4,040; 1927, &#x00A3;4,169; 1928, &#x00A3;3,796; 1929 (eleven months), &#x00A3;5,046. Final net figures for 1929 are not yet available. Subsequent recoveries, and credits in respect of salvage, etc., have still to be deducted from this amount.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Asiatic Repatriations.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the total number of Asiatics who left South Africa under the voluntary repatriation scheme from January to December, 1929, inclusive, with particulars of men, women and children so repatriated;</li>

<li>(2) how many repatriated Indians returned to South Africa during the same period; and</li>

<li>(3) whether any records are now kept of the occupation of Indians repatriated under the voluntary scheme or returning to South Africa; and, if not, why not &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nel">

<from><span class="col_79-80" refersTo="page_0108"/>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 596 men, 249 women, 491 children; total, 1,336.</li>

<li>(2) 18 men, 9 women, 26 children; total, 53.</li>

<li>(3) Yes, but the occupations are not tabulated.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Hominy Chop Exports.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many bags of hominy chop were exported from the Union under the Certificate of the Department of Agriculture during the years 1924, 1925, 1926, 1927, 1928 and 1929;</li>

<li>(2) what quantity of the abovementioned hominy chop was rejected by the purchasers through it not complying with the department&#x2019;s certificate;</li>

<li>(3) whether any rejections were due to the hominy chop being adulterated;</li>

<li>(4) what steps have been taken to determine the responsibility for the issue of export certificates for hominy chop of inferior quality; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the export of hominy chop to Germany has increased or decreased since the ratification of the German Treaty, and, if so, to what extent&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#nel">

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Auctioneers&#x2019; Licences.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior what was the total number of auctioneers&#x2019; licences issued in 1928 (a) in the Cape Province, (b) in the Transvaal Province, (c) in the Orange Free State Province, (d) in the Natal Province&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>(a) Cape, 421; (b) Transvaal, 233; (c) Orange Free State, 155; (d) Natal, 104.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Native Poll Tax.</heading>

<question by="#van_coller" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. VAN COLLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether, in view of the fact that to a very large extent the native poll tax on bona fide farm servants is paid by the farmer himself and is a direct tax on him, and in view of the fact that farm servants derive no benefits of education from the Native Development Fund, the Minister will be prepared to so amend the law as to exempt all bona fide farm servants from the payment of poll tax &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#van_coller">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The native poll tax is a liability imposed on the native and not on the farmer. If the latter pays the tax he does so on behalf of the native and not on his own account. The statement that the tax is a direct burden on the farmer is not understood, as the farmer is in a position to recover the amount of the tax from the native. I am not prepared to introduce amending legislation as desired by the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Stegmann&#x2019;s Rest, Muizenberg.</heading>

<question by="#waterson" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. WATERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence whether, in connection with the sale of the property Stegmann&#x2019;s Rest, Muizenberg, in 1929&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) a tender or offer was received by the Department of Defence from the Department of Posts and Telegraphs for this property, which adjoins the Muizenberg Post Office; if so,</li>

<li>(b) what was the amount of the offer or tender; and</li>

<li>(c) whether the property was sold to a private individual; and, if so, at what price &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#waterson">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(a) and (b) I have no knowledge of any such tender.</li>

<li>(c) Yes&#x2014;the property was sold by public auction for &#x00A3;3,525.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Wool Imports.</heading>

<question by="#payn" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Mr. PAYN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the total amount in weight and value of wool imported into the Union during the years 1925, 1926, 1927 and 1928, respectively;</li>

<li>(2) for what purposes was this wool utilized; and</li>

<li>(3) what is the estimated amount which will accrue from the recently-imposed levy on wool, from native grown wool, and whether provision has been made for the expenditure thereof in the interests of native producers; and, if so, how it is proposed to deal therewith &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#payn">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Quantity, 1925, 155,433 lbs.; value, &#x00A3;8,451, 1926, 513,743 lbs.; value, &#x00A3;20,855, 1927, 563,279 lbs.; value, &#x00A3;22,179, 1928, 942,942 lbs.; value, &#x00A3;50,990.</li>

<li>(2) This wool is utilized for the manufacture of coarse materials and in blanket factories for the manufacture of kaffir blankets. South African wool is too fine and soft and a certain percentage of imported wool has to be used to obtain the desired results.</li>

<li>(3) It is estimated that the amount which will accrue from the levy tor a whole season will be between &#x00A3;40,000&#x2014;&#x00A3;45,000, to which native areas will contribute approximately &#x00A3;3,000&#x2014;&#x00A3;4,000. It is proposed to hand over a pro rata share of the total sum for the improvement of the native wool industry, and the Director of Native Agriculture will represent native interests on the proposed Board of Control. Only a portion, however, of the estimated annual amount will be realized this season owing to shipment and sales of this season&#x2019;s wool prior to 1st January, the date on which the levy came into force</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_81-82" refersTo="page_0109"/>Mr. T. G. Strachan.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) To what post has Mr. T. G. Strachan been appointed in the Department of Labour;</li>

<li>(2) what are his emoluments; and</li>

<li>(3) what was his age at the date of his appointment &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Labour Adviser.</li>

<li>(2) The hon. member will find the salary attaching to this office set down in the estimates which will be submitted to the House.</li>

<li>(3) 54 years of age.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#hon_member">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>I should like to ask the Minister what qualifications, other than the fact that he was the defeated Pact candidate, does Mr. Strachan possess for the appointment &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#hon_member" to="#anderson">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>Petty!</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>A lifelong association with labour organizations and many other qualifications to fit him for the appointment.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Having started his career in the public service at the age of 54 years, at what age will this promising entrant be considered by the Minister to be fit for a pension&#x003F; Mr. Speaker, I hope you will excuse my somewhat flamboyant style, but the question is seriously intended and I expect an answer to it. I should like to ask if it is a fact that the Government are dispensing with the services of men in other departments&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>That question does not arise out of the answer.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Are there any competent officials in the well-staffed department of labour who are qualified to take this appointment, and who would gladly have accepted promotion to it &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>The hon. member will have ample opportunity to discuss every servant in my department when we come to the Estimates.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#kentridge" to="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. KENTRIDGE:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member give consideration to the claims of the other defeated candidate. Mr. Snow&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<question by="#gilson" to="#speaker">

<from>Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>A gentleman has been appointed as labour adviser. Will the hon. Minister inform the House whom he advises&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#kentridge">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I cannot allow any further such questions.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Senator Boydell.</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister whether the hon. Thomas Boydell was appointed as a senator to represent the natives or the Europeans&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#nicholls">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I must refer the hon. member to Government Notice No. 1723 in the Government Gazette of the 27th September, 1929, wherein the appointment of nominated senators was notified.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#prime_minister">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the hon. Prime Minister tell the House what kind, sort, or description of people the hon. senator does represent in the higher sphere of usefulness to which he has been called in another place&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#marwick">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I do not think my hon. friend is serious when he puts that question.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Wool, Freights on.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, in view of the very large clip of wool, the serious fall in the price of wool, and the critical condition of the industry, the South African Shipping Board has taken any steps to secure a reduction of the freight on wool, which still stands at its maximum as fixed under the freight agreement, viz., &#xd00BE;. per lb. less 7&#x00BD; per cent.; and, if so, with what result &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The South African Shipping Board has given serious consideration to the question of the ocean freight on wool, as well as the freight on a number of other articles, notably tin plate, and has made suitable representations to the Conference lines in connection therewith. The Conference lines are still considering the matter of the ocean freight on wool, and it is sincerely hoped that, in view of the strength of the representations which have been made, a suitable reduction will be forthcoming.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>*Mr. SWART:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister whether he is prepared to lay on the Table a statement showing the subjects which have been disposed of by the board, and what their conclusions were &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#swart">

<from>*The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Increments.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What are the names of the officials or daily paid men employed by the South African Railways and Harbours whose merits have justified their increments being granted to them before the due date; and</li>

<li>(2) to which of the officials or daily paid men concerned have such increments been paid, and at what rate per annum in each case &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) To give a complete list, as desired by the hon. member, would <span class="col_83-84" refersTo="page_0110"/>necessitate examination of thousands of record cards, especially as no particular period has been specified. The hon. member may, however, accept my assurance that, during the past twelve months alone, there were many cases in which servants of the Administration, both officers and daily-paid men, were granted their increments before the due date. Definite provision for this procedure is made in the staff regulations.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the hon. Minister supply a list if I give him the dates within which information is desired &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The hon. member must give notice of that question.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Hotel Licences.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether, in view of the burdensome effect of the present rate for annual licences for country hotels, the Government will introduce legislation during the present session amending the provisions in relation to the charge for licences of the present liquor law &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Several amendments to the Liquor Act are being considered, but it will be impossible to introduce amending legislation during the present session.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#krige" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. KRIGE:</from>

<p>In view of the impossibility imposed upon farmers, hotel proprietors and other people in the trade to carry out the obscure and burdensome provisions of the present Liquor Act, I would like to ask if the Minister is determined not to bring in any amending legislation as definitely promised by him last session&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#krige">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>It is impossible to deal with all the proposed amendments this session, and to deal with some amendments and to leave out others would cause more dissatisfaction than to allow the whole matter to stand over until next session.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Conference on Imperial Relationships.</heading>

<question by="#friend" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. FRIEND</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the representatives of the Union Government at the Conference on Imperial Relationships in London (Mr. F. W. Beyers and Dr. Bodenstein, Secretary for External Affairs) endeavoured to get the various representatives at that conference to admit that the Union was free to secede from the British commonwealth of nations at any time she desired to do so; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether this attitude was adopted with the approval of the Prime Minister&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#friend">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The representatives of the Union Government were guided by the generally-admitted principle, unequivocally recorded by the Imperial Conference of 1926 that the association of the British commonwealth of nations rests on the free will of its members. There was, therefore, no need for them to press for the recognition of an admitted fact.</li>

<li>(2) As for me, I am not in the habit of questioning either my country&#x2019;s undoubted freedom or its undisputed rights.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#friend" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. FRIEND:</from>

<p>Did they press that question&#x003F; Yes, or no&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#friend">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>No, I do not know.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Mr. Sampson and Socialism.</heading>

<question by="#friend" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. FRIEND</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he recently made the following statements in public: (a) &#x201C;After twenty years of experience, I am not so sure that I am such a strong State socialist as I used to be&#x201D;; (b) &#x201C;if we examined the rates of pay and conditions under which many State servants are working, there is very little to be proud of. Better conditions are often found in private employment&#x201D;; (c) &#x201C;I do not consider it the business of the State to interfere in any industry that has been given &#x2018;home rule&#x2019;&#x201D;; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether he will indicate what conditions of State employment he referred to in (b) and what definition is to be placed upon the term &#x201C;home rule&#x201D; &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#friend">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No. The statements the hon. member refers to represent only pieces of a private address I gave at the annual conference of the S.A. Labour party at the beginning of this year.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away, in the circumstances, but I can tell the hon. member what I meant by the term &#x201C;home rule&#x201D; in this case. It referred to industries where national industrial councils have been instituted under the Industrial Conciliation Act.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us whether we can get a full report of what he did say on that occasion&#x003F;</p>

<p>[Reply inaudible.]</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Police and Illicit Liquor.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XXV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the number of plain clothes members of the police force employed in the Liquor Branch, Johannesburg, for the suppression of the illicit liquor traffic when the new Liquor Act came into force;</li>

<li>(2) to what extent has the number of plain clothes members of the force employed in the same capacity been increased since that date; and</li>

<li><span class="col_85-86" refersTo="page_0111"/>(3) why has the increase been rendered necessary &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Thirteen Europeans and twelve coloured and native detectives.</li>

<li>(2) The number has been increased by seven Europeans and ten coloured detectives. As circumstances demand additional members of the Criminal Investigation Department are attached to the Liquor Branch for temporary duty for short periods. This has been the practice both before and after the passing of the present Liquor Act.</li>

<li>(3) The increase has been rendered necessary for better control of licensed houses and to keep down the increased skokiaan traffic.</li>

</ol>

<p>These figures relate to Johannesburg magisterial district.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is there any truth in the statement published in the press that there has been a large increase in the illicit liquor traffic on the Rand in consequence of the fact that fines may now be imposed, instead of imprisonment without the option of a fine&#x003F;</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Women&#x2019;s Franchise.</heading>

<question by="#de_wet" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. W. F. DE WET</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister whether it is his intention to introduce legislation during the present session which will extend the franchise to women &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#de_wet">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Harvests and Prospects.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Who supplies the department with information about the prospects of the harvests in different parts of the country for publication from time to time;</li>

<li>(2) by whom are those persons appointed; and</li>

<li>(3) whether they receive any remuneration, and, if so, how much&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) The crop reporters who are all established farmers are appointed by the department on the recommendations of magistrates and agricultural organizations.</li>

<li>(3) They do not receive remuneration.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Native Lepers, Rowdyism by.</heading>

<question by="#van_broekhuizen" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>XXVIII.</num>

<from>Dr. VAN BROEKHUIZEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Health:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has received any information with regard to the rowdyism of the native lepers in Pretoria;</li>

<li>(2) whether he can give the House any information of the cause of this disturbance; and</li>

<li>(3) seeing that this is serious and the cause of bloodshed, whether he will have the matter investigated &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#van_broekhuizen">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) The disturbance was caused by Xosa and Pondo inmates of the institution, numbering 35 in all, including six who had been sent to Pretoria in May last from leper institutions in the Transkei for disciplinary reasons after causing trouble there. It has been the custom to send ordinary native patients admitted to the Pretoria Institution from places in the Transvaal but domiciled in the Transkei, to the Emjanyana and Skambati Institutions in batches at convenient intervals, and at the time of the disturbance arrangements for sending a further batch, including most of the Transkeian patients, were in course of completion. On 21st instant these patients approached the superintendent and demanded to be transferred at once. He explained the position but this did not satisfy them and they refused to disperse when called upon. The superintendent then called upon the sergeant of the institution police to have them removed, whereupon they quickly dispersed and in a few minutes armed themselves with sticks and stones which they had concealed in the grass and lined up in a threatening attitude. Meantime the institution police and overseers had been collected and the recalcitrants were called upon to lay down their weapons. Instead of doing so they charged the police and a sharp fight ensued, continuing for about ten minutes. The recalcitrants then surrendered and 30 were lodged in gaol. Several of the police boys and four or five patients sustained severe cuts on the head. The other patients took no part in the disturbance.</li>

<li>(3) The superintendent is holding an enquiry and will deal with the rioters by sentencing them under the institution regulations to solitary or separate confinement and otherwise. He considers that batches of Transkeian patients should be sent to institutions in the Transkei at more frequent intervals in future, and that six of the ringleaders, namely three Xosas and three Pondos, should be detained in the Pretoria institution.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Lord Melchett and Free Trade.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXIX.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether he will take advantage of the forthcoming visit to the Union of Lord Melchett to discuss with him the principles of Empire free trade, of which he is an exponent, with the object of ascertaining whether the adoption of such principles in relation to certain of the Union&#x2019;s raw products could not be made to minister to the advantage of the primary producer&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Does the Minister see no advantage in such a discussion&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from><span class="col_87-88" refersTo="page_0112"/>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The Minister has given his reply.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Agricultural Unions.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXX.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is prepared to recommend or authorize the continued payment by the Land Bank of an annual grant to each agricultural union in South Africa in aid of the expenses of such organizations;</li>

<li>(2) whether he stated to representatives of such unions that he would not favour the payment of any such grant unless the officials employed by the unions were fully bilingual; and</li>

<li>(3) whether he is aware that in the case of certain officials of the agricultural unions who have rendered devoted service to the agricultural industry their services would be lost to the industry if they were required either to become fully bilingual or to relinquish office&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes, provided the condition imposed by the Land Bank of active encouragement by the unions of co-operative organization is continued.</li>

<li>(2) Yes.</li>

<li>(3) No. It is not clear to me why the services of officials should be lost to the industry if they should become bilingual. In any case twenty years have elapsed since Union and I consider that in order to function effectively the officials of the agricultural unions if not bilingual certainly should be so.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. RICHARDS:</from>

<p>Are we to understand that the Minister lays it down that every British official employed by agricultural bodies is to be discharged before he will continue any further grants&#x003F; For that is what it amounts to if his threat is carried out.</p>

</question>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is the Minister not aware that two of the ablest secretaries of agricultural unions in South Africa&#x2014;Mr, Mitchell of the Natal Union and Mr. Woodin of the Eastern Province Union&#x2014;will have to relinquish their positions if the Minister&#x2019;s dictum is enforced &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#richards">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>The hon. member can give notice of the question or discuss it on the Estimates.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: English Bank Note, Tender of.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXXI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether on Sunday evening, the 12th January, 1930, a booking clerk at Pietermaritzburg declined to accept a &#x00A3;5 Bank of England note which was tendered in payment of a railway fare by a visiting tourist, on the ground that it was not legal tender; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, in view of the fact that such notes are accepted in the U.S.A. and other foreign countries, the Minister will consider the advisability of allowing them to be accepted by the Railway Administration &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes, by a clerk temporarily employed in the booking office who had overlooked the instructions regarding the acceptance of such notes.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Native William, Assault Case.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE replied to Question IX, by Mr. Nathan, standing over from 21st January.</p>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_justice">

<heading>QUESTION:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he will lay upon the Table of the House a copy of the record of a case heard at Johannesburg about the 21st December, 1929, wherein a native named William pleaded guilty to a charge of assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm to one Frank, the accused having stabbed him with a knife, on the evening of the 8th December; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will obtain the reasons of the presiding magistrate for the apparent leniency shown in the case in that the accused was fined only &#x00A3;5 or alternatively one month&#x2019;s imprisonment &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#nathan">

<heading>REPLY:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) No, but the hon. member can obtain a copy of the record at my office.</li>

<li>(2) I have no power to obtain reasons for judgment; the only time when such reasons can be obtained is when an appeal is noted.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that there is a strong feeling on the Rand in regard to this question&#x003F; I have made no comment on the judgment because I would like to know the magistrate&#x2019;s reasons for giving the judgment he did.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#cattle_improvements_bill">

<heading>CATTLE IMPROVEMENTS BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Agriculture to introduce the Cattle Improvements Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 3rd February.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#dairy_industry_control_bill">

<heading>DAIRY INDUSTRY CONTROL BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Agriculture to introduce the Dairy Industry Control Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 5th February.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1930-01-24T15:17:00">3.17 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

