---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - TUESDAY 8 APRIL 1930'
layout: debate
year: 1930
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 8th APRIL, 1930.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1930-04-08T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service: Chief Clerk, Agriculture.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) On what date was the post of chief clerk in his department abolished;</li>

<li>(2) what was the actual saving effected thereby;</li>

<li>(3) on what date was this saving more than counterbalanced by the appointment of additional staff in the chief clerk&#x2019;s branch of the department, and what was the amount of such additional expenditure;</li>

<li>(4) whether the Minister approached the Public Service Commission for authority to re-establish the post of chief clerk; if so, what was the date of his doing so; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table a copy of the letter requesting such authority and a copy of the Commission&#x2019;s reply?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 1.10.27.</li>

<li>(2) &#x00A3;352.</li>

<li>(3) 1.5.28 by the appointment of a senior clerk in the staff branch. This appointment was recommended in January, 1927, that is eight months before the abolition of the chief clerkship and was unavoidable owing to the heavy increase in staff duties whether or not the chief clerk were retained.</li>

<li>(4) No; but during the course of last year owing to the heavy increase in staff duties a suggestion was put forward to the Public Service Commission that the grading of the staff clerk might be improved to that of a second grade chief clerk provided that such improvement was in accordance with practice in other departments of State. The suggestion was, however, not approved by the Public Service Commission.</li>

<li><span class="col_2877-2878" refersTo="page_1511"/>(5) No; but the hon. member can see the papers in my office.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Coal Prices.</heading>

<question by="#acutt" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. ACUTT (for Mr. Nicoll)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What are the contract prices f.o.r. pithead for (a) Natal and (b) Transvaal coal for the years 1929-&#x2019;30 and 1930-&#x2019;31 for use on the Union railways; and</li>

<li>(2) what are the quantities of (a) Transvaal coal used in 1929-&#x2019;30 and (b) Natal coal used in 1929-&#x2019;30 in the Provinces of Cape Colony, Orange Free State, Natal and Transvaal, respectively&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#acutt">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>(1) (a)</p></td>

<td><p>1929-&#x2019;30.</p></td>

<td><p>1930-&#x2019;31.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Per ton.</p></td>

<td><p>Per ton.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>5s. 0d.</p></td>

<td><p>4s. 6d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>5s. 2d.</p></td>

<td><p>5s. 0d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>5s. 6d.</p></td>

<td><p>5s. 2d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>5s. 8d.</p></td>

<td><p>5s. 6d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>6s. 0d.</p></td>

<td><p>6s. 0d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>b</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>5s. 2d.</p></td>

<td><p>5s. 2d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>5s. 3d.</p></td>

<td><p>5s. 3d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>5s. 4d.</p></td>

<td><p>5s. 4d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>5s. 5d.</p></td>

<td><p>5s. 5d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>5s. 9d.</p></td>

<td><p>5s. 9d.</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>(2) (a)</p></td>

<td><p>Cape</p></td>

<td><p>1,261,368</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Orange Free State</p></td>

<td><p>521,121</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Natal</p></td>

<td><p>Nil.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Transvaal</p></td>

<td><p>767,586</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>(b) Cape</p></td>

<td><p>Nil.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Orange Free State</p></td>

<td><p>52,881</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Natal</p></td>

<td><p>589,994</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Transvaal</p></td>

<td><p>59,769</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Cattle: Permits.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many applications for permits to move cattle for breeding purposes for the improvement of blood (in terms of the statement made by the Minister of Agriculture in this House on the 13th August, 1929) into the Union from Swazieland were made during the years 1926, 1927, 1928 and 1929, giving the names of successful and unsuccessful applicants;</li>

<li>(2) what was the east coast fever position in Swazieland during the years mentioned in (1), as reflected by official returns, giving the number and situation of infected areas and fresh outbreaks for each year;</li>

<li>(3) what route was traversed by the cattle moved under the permit granted to Mr. N. C. Havenga and over what route was it proposed to move the cattle under the permit applied for by Mr. Marwick;</li>

<li>(4) what is the name of the person other than Mr. Havenga to whom a permit was granted to move cattle into the Union from Swazieland for breeding purposes, giving the date of application, the number of cattle, the type of breed and the route traversed;</li>

<li>(5) what type or types of breeding cattle were moved under the permit granted to Mr. Havenga and whether any of the animals were stud book animals; and</li>

<li>(6) what are the names of the farms to which the cattle referred to in (5) were moved, in whose name are the farms registered and to whom do the cattle belong?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 12 unsuccessful applicants as under: 1926. N. Gordon; 1927, A. T. Boast, Franklin; 1928, Goss Estates; 1929, Craig and Wentzel, T. Booth, W. J. Clark, J. Tineberg, Lomati Estates, R. Craig, H. 8. G. Kiernander, C Landsberg. None of the applicants in 1929 were able to comply with the department&#x2019;s requirements in regard mainly to quarantine on the border on a fenced and tanked farm. Further, owing to fresh outbreaks of east coast fever with heavy mortality in the Mankiana district, my veterinary advisers were not prepared to recommend the applications. Two successful applicants as under : 1928, Hon. N. C. Havenga on condition that animals were to follow a prescribed route and to be quarantined for 30 days on a fenced and tanked farm on the border; 1929, T. C. Booth&#x2014;A purebred bull to be conveyed for the entire journey by motor and to be quarantined for 30 days at destination.</li>

<li>(2) This department has no control over veterinary matters in Swazieland and cannot therefore furnish complete information as to the east coast fever position, this matter is at present forming the subject of discussion with the Swazieland authorities and I am not prepared to say more than that my veterinary advisers considered that the risk of introducing east coast fever into the Union justified the refusal of permits for the introduction of cattle as stated in (1).</li>

<li>(3) The route traversed by Mr. Havenga&#x2019;s cattle was in accordance with directions laid down by the principal veterinary officer of Swazieland as safe. The question of Mr. Marwick&#x2019;s proposed route did not arise in view of what is stated in my reply to (2).</li>

<li>(4) See reply to (1).</li>

<li>(5) and (6) I do not see that this is in any way a matter of public interest on which the hon. member can expect a reply.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>I would like to put a direct question to the Minister&#x2014;Whether these animals were stud, pedigree or grade animals?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>High grade animals, selected out of a group of 5,000.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us what a high grade animal is?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>Mr. MADELEY:</from>

<p>A Nationalist.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Diamond Syndicate.</heading>

<question by="#henderson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num><span class="col_2879-2880" refersTo="page_1512"/>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. HENDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to the statement that an action for damages was recently brought against the Diamond Syndicate in London by the British Guiana Corporation, which action was ultimately settled by the Diamond Syndicate agreeing to pay &#x00A3;325,000 plus &#x00A3;25,000 costs;</li>

<li>(2) whether the basis of the above claim was fraudulent action by the Diamond Syndicate;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Diamond Syndicate concerned in this matter is the same syndicate that handles the sale of diamonds on behalf of companies in which the Government has a large share and interest; and, if so,</li>

<li>(4) whether he is satisfied that there is no cause for anxiety in regard to the treatment of those companies by the syndicate?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#henderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) I have no information on the matter beyond what has appeared in the local press</li>

<li>(3) Yes.</li>

<li>(4) Yes. The interests of the producers who are parties to the inter-producers&#x2019; agreement in their dealing with the syndicate are protected by an auditor appointed by them jointly. So far as the company in which the Government has a large share and interest is concerned, its transactions with the syndicate have for many years been scrutinized by my department and this scrutiny has disclosed no ground for complaint as to the manner in which the syndicate has carried out its side of these transactions.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. MUNNIK:</from>

<p>I want to ask the Minister if the same company is functioning in South Africa, and also in regard to the Premier Mine, acting in a dual capacity&#x003F; Is the Minister quite satisfied that the same methods and tactics have not been applied as in Guiana, where they &#x201C;mixed sand with the sugar&#x201D;&#x003F;</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Diamonds: Export Duty.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON (for Mr. Buirski)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What has been the loss to the State up to date as a result of the reduced export duty on cut diamonds and as a result of the subsidy paid to the firm of Rosenstrauch Brothers &#x0026; Korbf, Kimberley, and other similar subsidies:</li>

<li>(2) (a) what is the value of cut diamonds exported by the firm Rosenstrauch Brothers &#x0026; Korbf from the time they commenced operations up to the present, (b) what was the loss to the State on these diamonds, and (c) what was the nature of the work executed on these diamonds exported by the said firm;</li>

<li>(3) how many South African youths, either apprentices or others, have up to the present become unemployed in consequence of the depression or closing down of diamond-cutting factories in the Union and of these how many were employed by the firm Rosenstrauch Brothers &#x0026; Korbf in Kimberley; and</li>

<li>(4) what the Government intends to do towards helping these apprentices and others to earn a living?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#munnik">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The loss incurred as the result of the reduced export tax provided for in the agreement between the Government and Messrs. Rosenstrauch Brothers &#x0026; Korbf amounted to &#x00A3;855, and in addition this firm has so far received &#x00A3;15,000 in the form of subsidy under that agreement. The diamonds of no other firm have been exported at reduced rates.</li>

<li>(2) (a) &#x00A3;390,728; (b) &#x00A3;34,686 is what was lost in export duty; (c) they went through the ordinary processes of cutting and polishing.</li>

<li>(3) Twenty-one, none of whom was employed by the firm of Rosenstrauch Brothers &#x0026; Korbf.</li>

<li>(4) It is hoped that when conditions improve in the trade, these boys will find no difficulty in obtaining employment.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Irrigation: Kaap Valley.</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether he will lay upon the Table the report dated the 13th September, 1927, by Mr. Jordaan, of the commission appointed by the Mines Department to investigate the question of the water rights in the Kaap Valley, district Barberton&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The report, which is dated the 25th November, 1927, and not 13th September, 1927, as stated by the hon. member, was prepared purely for departmental purposes, and I regret being unable to see my way to lay it on the Table.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Surely the Minister might let us have this; there is nothing secret about it.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The hon. member can see it in the office.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Citrus Fruit Freights.</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Departmental Railway Tariffs Committee for 1930 has recommended an increase in the tariff for the transport of citrus fruits; if so,</li>

<li>(2) what is the amount of the proposed increase; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister proposes putting the committee&#x2019;s suggestion (if any) into operation?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li><span class="col_2881-2882" refersTo="page_1513"/>(1) and (2) In paragraph 310 of the report of the Departmental Railway Tariffs Inquiry Committee, which was laid on the Table of the House on the 19th March, are given the committee&#x2019;s proposals regarding the rates on citrus fruit railed to the ports for export.</li>

<li>(3) The report has not yet been considered in detail; consequently a decision has not been readied concerning the committee&#x2019;s proposals.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Miners&#x2019; Phthisis.</heading>

<question by="#o&#x2019;brien" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. O&#x2019;BRIEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the average annual amount paid in compensation to European phthisis sufferers and their dependents during the period of four years from the date the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Consolidation Act of 1925 became operative;</li>

<li>(2) what was the corresponding figure paid out during the same period to native phthisis sufferers and their dependents;</li>

<li>(3) what was the average annual amount paid by the phthisis mines in levies for compensation purposes;</li>

<li>(4) what is the present value of the compensation liabilities of phthisis mines;</li>

<li>(5) what was the average annual amount earmarked by the phthisis mines for future compensation liabilities;</li>

<li>(6) what is the total amount earmarked so far by the phthisis mines towards their future compensation liabilities;</li>

<li>(7) what is the cost per annum for every underground European shift worked in the phthisis mines in relation to (a) the average annual amount paid in compensation to miners suffering from miners&#x2019; phthisis and their dependents and (b) the average annual amount earmarked by the phthisis mines for future compensation liabilities including the average annual amount actually paid in compensation; and</li>

<li>(8) what is the total amount paid in compensation to phthisis sufferers and their dependents, including Europeans, coloured and natives up to 31st March, 1930&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#o&#x2019;brien">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) &#x00A3;911,747.</li>

<li>(2) &#x00A3;68,238.</li>

<li>(3) &#x00A3;800,000.</li>

<li>(4) &#x00A3;6,400,000.</li>

<li>(5) &#x00A3;362,500.</li>

<li>(6) &#x00A3;1,450,000.</li>

<li>(7) (a) 5s. 9d. per underground European shift worked, (b) 8s. per underground European shift worked.</li>

<li>(8) &#x00A3;12,384,265.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Motor Bus, Ashton.</heading>

<question by="#waterson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. WATERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What provision is made for the convenience of passengers travelling from Montagu by the railway bus who have to wait at Ashton Station from half-past nine in the evening until early the following morning for the train connection to Cape Town; and</li>

<li>(2) whether any complaints in this connection have been received by the Administration?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#waterson">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) They are accommodated in a composite sleeping coach which is detached from the train scheduled to arrive at Ashton at 9 p.m. This coach remains overnight at Ashton and is attached to the train timed to depart for Cape Town at 5 a.m.</li>

<li>(2) No.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Oats and Barley Freights.</heading>

<question by="#wares" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Col. WARES (for Mr. McIlwraith)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours what tonnage of oats and barley has been shipped since the reduction in railway and freight rates?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#wares">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Oats, 75 tons; barley, nil.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Magistrates&#x2019; Courts Rules.</heading>

<question by="#van_coller" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. VAN COLLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to the statement of Mr. Justice Curlewis of the Appeal Court, in the case of Parker vs. Keith, where he said &#x201C;that it was to be regretted that such an involved and complicated set of rules had been framed for the magistrates&#x2019; courts and that the rules were needlessly elaborated and increased the costs of litigation in the magistrate&#x2019;s court&#x201D;;</li>

<li>(2) how many cases have gone to appeal to the higher courts from the magistrates&#x2019; courts concerning judgments or orders in respect of such rules for the years 1925 to 1929;</li>

<li>(3) how many of such appeals have been (a) successful and (b) dismissed; and</li>

<li>(4) whether the Minister will be prepared to consider the whole question of substituting a simpler and less confusing system of rules, as suggested by the learned judge, with a view to minimizing the cost of litigation in the lower courts&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#van_coller">

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Miners&#x2019; Phthisis.</heading>

<question by="#brown" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. BROWN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many dependents of phthisis sufferers and of deceased beneficiaries have been trained and are still being trained under the schemes inaugurated by the <span class="col_2883-2884" refersTo="page_1514"/>Miners&#x2019; phthisis Board authorized by the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act of 1925 (Act No. 35 of 1925);</li>

<li>(2) (a) what is the total cost of such training to date and (b) what is the cost per capita;</li>

<li>(3) how many phthisis dependents have been placed in employment by the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Board;</li>

<li>(4) how many phthisis men have been found employment by the board since that duty was assigned to it;</li>

<li>(5) to what extent has the Government cooperated with the board in finding employment for phthisis sufferers;</li>

<li>(6) whether the board is working in cooperation with any other institutions or public bodies with a view to finding suitable surface employment for phthisis sufferers; if so, what institutions or public bodies, and to what extent have the joint efforts met with success; and</li>

<li>(7) whether it is the intention of the Government to discontinue the work of training of dependents and of finding employment for phthisis sufferers; if not, whether the Government will consider the advisability of assisting the board to increase its activities in that direction?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#van_coller">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 1,600.</li>

<li>(2) (a) Approximately &#x00A3;33,000, (b) &#x00A3;20 per capita, which includes cost of materials, books, tools, tuition fees and transport of pupils.</li>

<li>(3) 1,400.</li>

<li>(4) 4,010.</li>

<li>(5) The Departments of Labour, Public Works and Lands, the South African Railways and the Transaval Provincial Administration have from time to time co-operated with the board in finding employment for phthisis men, on land settlements, railway construction, road construction, public works and in public buildings.</li>

<li>(6) The board also co-operates with the Government white labour bureau, the Mine Managers&#x2019; Association, the Underground Officials&#x2019; Association, the scheduled gold mines, the managements of coal, tin, copper, asbestos, platinum, diamond and other outside mines, with the Johannesburg and other Reef municipalities, business concerns and other large employers of labour. With the help and co-operation of these institutions and public bodies, the board has been able to place a large number of phthisis men in suitable surface employment.</li>

<li>(7) It is not the Government&#x2019;s intention to discontinue the good work at present being done by the board in regard to training the dependents and finding employment for phthisis sufferers. The Government will, as far as possible, give the board every assistance to increase its activities in that direction.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Transportation Pupils.</heading>

<question by="#waterson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. WATERSON (for Mr. Lawrence)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a competitive examination for transportation pupils was held at Johannesburg in September, 1929; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) (a) how many candidates sat for that examination, (b) how many candidates were notified subsequently of their success, (c) what were the highest marks obtained in that examination by any one candidate, (d) what were the lowest marks obtained by any one successful candidate, and (e) how many marks did the competitor E. W. Tillman obtain?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#waterson">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) (a) 18. (b) 4. (c) 907 marks equal to 77.5 per cent, (d) 661 marks equal to 56.5 per cent, (e) 695 marks equal to 59.4 per cent.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service: Clerks.</heading>

<question by="#pocock" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. POCOCK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the total number of clerical assistants and other employees of equivalent grades in the public service, excluding the police, prison and defence services, what were the total salaries and emoluments of such assistants and employees for the year ending 31st March, 1925, and what are their estimated salaries and emoluments for the year ending 31st March, 1931; and</li>

<li>(2) what are the corresponding figures in respect of all officers or professional assistants above the grades mentioned in (1)?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#pocock">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) Clerical officers, etc.: 1925, 12,220: salaries and allowances, &#x00A3;3,337,951; 1931, 18,131: salaries and allowances, &#x00A3;4,187,071. Other officers (administrative, professional and technical): salaries and allowances, 1925, 1,771: &#x00A3;1,310,227; 1931, 2,355; salaries and allowances, &#x00A3;1,452,949. The foregoing statement does not include the figures in respect of the four provincial administrations and the mandated territory.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Beef Consignment Condemned.</heading>

<question by="#friend" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. FRIEND</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Health:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a second consignment of South African beef was condemned on arrival at Glasgow as unfit for human consumption:</li>

<li>(2) whether South African beef is inspected before it leaves the Union; and</li>

<li>(3) (a) who is the inspector and (b) what are his qualifications&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#friend">

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.)</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Police Recruits.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the training of recruits for the South African Police has been changed from a police to a military basis; if so,</li>

<li><span class="col_2885-2886" refersTo="page_1515"/>(2) (a) what are the reasons for the change and (b) when did it commence to take effect; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table a statement giving in detail the present system of police recruit training?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#richards">

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Iron and Steel Industry.</heading>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Mr. MADELEY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether, in accepting tenders for plant and equipment for the iron and steel industry at Pretoria, there will be recognition of trade reciprocity with Great Britain, as the best customer of the Union, and also of unequal conditions existing in lower wages and longer working days in other countries from which competitive tenders may come&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#friend">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>As the hon. member is aware, the South African Iron and Steel Industrial Corporation, Limited, is directed by a board which lays down policy in connection with the corporation&#x2019;s affairs without reference to the Government.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MADELEY:</from>

<p>May I remind the Minister that I am not asking whether it is his intention, but whether it is the intention&#x003F; May I ask what co-operation there is between Ministers at all?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#madeley">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The board decides these matters without referring them to the Government. The Government has no control over the board in matters of this kind.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MADELEY:</from>

<p>Will the Minister consider it within his province to ask the chairman of the board for the information&#x003F; May I ask whether it is not a fact that you have a Government nominee on the board?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Stellenbosch Election Petition.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What action, if any, has been taken by the attorney-general in connection with the observations of the Judge-President of the Cape Provincial Division of the Supreme Court in the case in which an election petition against the return of the hon. member for Stellenbosch at the general election was being heard, to the effect that there had been perjury on one side or the other beyond the possibility of mistake or misunderstanding and that it was a case which should go to the attorney-general for that officer and the police to come to a conclusion as to which person had committed perjury and as to whether there was evidence to support the other charges;</li>

<li>(2) what is the nature of the investigations which have been carried out by the attorney-general and the police and what decision has been arrived at by the attorney-general; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table the papers relating to this matter&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#madeley">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) The attorney-general is still busy making investigations. The criminal information collected so far has been submitted to the law advisers who remark as follows: We appreciate the attorney-general&#x2019;s difficulty. That perjury has been committed by various witnesses is evident. To prove it, it will be necessary to rely on the equally perjured evidence of other witnesses. No matter on what side the Crown relies it will be relying on a broken reed. We understand that a civil suit, in which the elements of the extortion charge will figure largely, is pending, and it might be as well to see how the various witnesses shape in that action before proceeding. In the meanwhile fresh evidence may come to light whereupon the matter can be reconsidered.</li>

<li>(3) No.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service : Retirals.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE replied to Question VIII, by Mr. Anderson, standing over from 25th March.</p>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<heading>QUESTION:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Since his assumption of office, how many officers of the Department of Agriculture have been retired before reaching the retiring age;</li>

<li>(2) by what amount has expenditure been increased by such retirement;</li>

<li>(3) whether such expenditure is chargeable to general revenue or pension funds;</li>

<li>(4) how many officers have been retained beyond the retiring age;</li>

<li>(5) how many are at present being retained beyond the retiring age;</li>

<li>(6) how many appointments have been made to posts in his department from outside the service;</li>

<li>(7) in how many cases, all other things being equal, has he given the appointment to a political partisan; and</li>

<li>(8) whether he will give the names of all cases referred to in paragraphs (1), (4),</li>

<li>(5), (6) and (7)&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<heading>REPLY:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) 22. 15 owing to abolition of office; 7 owing to ill-health.</li>

<li>(2) A saving of &#x00A3;8,215 has been effected.</li>

<li>(3) Falls away.</li>

<li>(4) Seven.</li>

<li>(5) None over 60, but a considerable number of &#x201C;Union&#x201D; officers who are satisfactory in the performance of their duties and are bilingual have been retained over the age of 55, the age at which the Government has the right to retire them.</li>

<li>(6) 1,705.</li>

<li>(7) I do not know.</li>

<li><span class="col_2887-2888" refersTo="page_1516"/>(8) A return will be laid upon the Table in regard to (1), (4) and (6).</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Can the Minister explain how it is that dealers are able to obtain better prices for their animals than breeders and farmers?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I do not know that that is so, but I shall be glad if the hon. member will raise this on the vote.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Police: Horses.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE replied to Question I, by Mr. Marwick, standing over from 28th March.</p>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<heading>QUESTION:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many horses (remounts) were purchased by the police during the last financial year;</li>

<li>(2) of the total number, how many were purchased (a) in the Cape, (b) in the Orange Free State, (c) in the Transvaal, (d) in Natal, (e) in the Kimberley area;</li>

<li>(3) of those bought in the Kimberley area, how many were bought from (a) horse dealers, (b) farmers or breeders;</li>

<li>(4) what was the average price paid to (a) dealers, (b) farmers or breeders in the Kimberley area;</li>

<li>(5) from how many farmers or breeders were horses purchased in the Kimberley area during the last financial year;</li>

<li>(6) from how many dealers were horses purchased in the same area during the same period;</li>

<li>(7) how many dealers offered horses to the police in this area during the same period;</li>

<li>(8) whether remounts have ever been purchased from dealers without an advertisement having appeared in local papers notifying the public, that remounts are required, and, if so, from whom;</li>

<li>(9) whether an advertisement has ever appeared notifying the remounts will be bought on a fixed date, such date being a day or two after the bulk of the police requirements have been purchased from dealers;</li>

<li>(10) how long after inoculation against horse sickness is there risk of an inoculated animal&#x2019;s death;</li>

<li>(11) when remounts have been purchased and inoculated by the department at seller&#x2019;s risk, how long is the seller held responsible for loss;</li>

<li>(12) whether farmers or breeders have ever had the opportunity of supplying horses under this system;</li>

<li>(13) what is the comparative price paid for horses bought to be inoculated at seller&#x2019;s risk and horses bought in the ordinary way;</li>

<li>(14) whether the purchasing of remounts is now in the absolute discretion of one officer;</li>

<li>(15) whether the purchasing of remounts was formerly entrusted to a board of these officers; and, if so,</li>

<li>(16) why has the system been changed?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<heading>REPLY:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) 449.</li>

<li>(2) (a) 47, (b) 28, (c) 33, (d) 3 and (e) 338.</li>

<li>(3) (a) 252, (b) 86.</li>

<li>(4) (a) &#x00A3;27, (b) &#x00A3;24.</li>

<li>(5) 12.</li>

<li>(6) 2.</li>

<li>(6) 3.</li>

<li>(7) Advertisements appeared twice in the Diamond Fields Advertiser and Die Volksblad (August and September), but so few horses were offered by farmers that on other occasions during the year persons having horses for sale were advised by police stations. Horses were purchased in this way from S. Diamond, who had previously advised the department that he had some hundreds of horses to select from.</li>

<li>(8) No.</li>

<li>(9) Twenty-one days from horse sickness, two to three months from staggers.</li>

<li>(10) For three months, during which time the owner has to feed the animals at his own expense. After the lapse of this time the department takes as many of these immunized animals as it desires at a price fixed before immunization. There is no obligation on the department to take a specific number, or, indeed, any at all.</li>

<li>(11) Yes, some farmers were given an opportunity of taking advantage of this system, but they refused. De Beers were the only breeders who agreed to this.</li>

<li>(12) Price of horses inoculated at seller&#x2019;s risk, &#x00A3;28 15s.; bought in the ordinary way, &#x00A3;27.</li>

<li>(13) No.</li>

<li>(14) Yes.</li>

<li>(15) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

<p>The above particulars are in respect of the financial year 1928-&#x2019;29 in terms of the question.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#forest_act_1913_amendment_bill">

<heading>FOREST ACT, 1913, AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Agriculture to introduce the Forest Act, 1913, Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 14th April.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#posts_and_telegraphs_commission">

<heading>POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS COMMISSION.</heading>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House requests the Government to consider the desirability of appointing a commission to enquire into and report upon the general administration of the Department of Posts and Telegraphs, with special reference to&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>(a) the retirement of the chief engineer, Col. R, McArthur, and subsequent degrading of the post of chief engineer;</li>

<li>(b) the system and methods of promotion;</li>

<li>(c) the abandonment of the proceedings to obtain refund of approximately &#x00A3;25,000 per annum, underpayment to the department <span class="col_2889-2890" refersTo="page_1517"/>by the Wireless Company of South Africa; and</li>

<li>(d) the desirability or otherwise of establishing separate postal and engineering (telegraphs and telephones) departments, each under a separate and distinct head.</li>

</ol>

<p>I am not much in sympathy with those people&#x2014; those members of this House&#x2014;who, for some weeks past have been preaching economy, translating that economy to mean that either you should reduce the cost of administration or not increase it. I do not regard that as really an honest form of preaching economy, and, honest or not, I do not believe that the cost of living in South Africa, nor anywhere else, is very much affected, either by the retention of its present level, or the subsequent increase of the cost of administration. But I do believe in economy, and, of course, there are some extraordinary outlooks on what is meant by economy. Some people, like those members I have referred to, have an idea that economy means not spending. I do not agree with that view at all. My view is: spend what you have to, but spend it wisely; that is economy. Economy should not, I think, be measured by the amount you spend, but by how it is spent, and it is in that light, economy being wise spending, and, in turn, coupled with efficiency, that I am referring to it now. In regard to efficiency, one is called upon to define precisely what that means. The bulk of the members of this House consider it means that your work should be done at high pressure, and at low wages. That is not my view of efficiency. Efficiency means, to my mind, getting the work done in the best possible way, naturally as cheaply as you can; that is complete efficiency, and, in turn, is the natural corollary of spending the money wisely in the form of wages or salaries, or in whatever direction is needed. It is entirely in that spirit I am approaching the matter. Now those members of this House who have the impression beforehand that I am putting this motion on paper and moving it with the intention of baiting the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs, are doomed to disappointment. I have no intention of baiting the Minister. I am hoping to delve into the matter much deeper than that. I am asking for a commission of enquiry, and I hope the Minister and his colleagues will agree that this commission should be of the strongest possible character; not the Public Service Commission, or a commission drawn from both sides of this House, either a majority here or on that side, nor a commission composed of any one of the political complexions represented in this House, even though not in the House themselves. In view of the considerations involved, the commission should be represented by those in whom the people of the country repose the utmost confidence, and I suggest it should be composed of members of the judicial bench; somebody who is above partisanship, and beyond being influenced by political considerations, whose whole object is to take the evidence and press the matter to a conclusion, giving that conclusion to the Government in the hope that the Government will receive it favourably, and act at once. My only quarrel with the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs is that he has failed to take hold. He has, I fear, surrendered to his officials. It may be, of course, that his own insecurity of tenure has something to do with that. I hope he will forgive me for suggesting that; I do not do it out of malice. I say from my short experience&#x2014;though longer than his&#x2014; I am convinced it is necessary for a Minister in any department to interest himself practically in all the ramifications of his department; to take the keenest interest in the question of promotions, and see that he gets the right men, and be very careful when he finds public-spirited officials coming within his ken&#x2014;and they should come within his ken&#x2014;to protect them, whatever disclosures they may make, in the direction of their retirement. I urge that seriously on the attention of the Minister, because therein lies real efficiency. Interest yourself personally in all the circumstances of the department, and hold on to those desirous of doing the best they can, and ruthlessly extinguish those who show a contrary intention or desire. I was dealing with the question of efficiency, and, of course, this means justice to individuals as a corollary. I found, shortly after my accession to office, that there was&#x2014; and it became abundantly clear, had been for many years&#x2014;tremendous friction between the administrative or clerical side of the department, and the engineering side, and I may say right away that that friction, resulting, perhaps, from a different point of view, or a misconception as to what is one&#x2019;s public duty&#x2014; that friction was making for inefficiency and ultimately resulted in the resignation or the compulsory retirement, or the retirement agreed upon on both sides, of the head of the department, Col. McArthur. That was the sequel. I believe it was on account of that friction between the branches of the department and the determination on his part to see things right in the department that he had to go. Translated literally, it is not wholly and solely personal. I again remind the House that this friction has been running right through the several regimes of my friends who sit on this side of the House, when they were in office. This friction still existed, I think, but if they were aware of it they did not tell the world. The engineering side and the clerical side have been at daggers drawn to the extent that the engineering side has never had a real opportunity of functioning properly, and the business of the department has suffered in consequence. Now I do not want to go into the whole of the history of it, nor do I wish to mention the various engineers who have been involved. I need only bring to the House the conditions which obtained with regard to a recently ex-engineer, Col. McArthur. At the outset, may I correct the hon. Minister in his answer&#x003F; The Minister was asked by the hon. member for Dundee (Mr. Friend) what was, amongst other things, the amount of pension that Col. McArthur received on retirement. I think the Minister said it was something like &#x00A3;500 per annum. Is that the correct figure&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from><span class="col_2891-2892" refersTo="page_1518"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>I said something higher than that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>No, you did not. However, the Minister will have the real answer at his disposal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>It was &#x00A3;520 per annum.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>To that extent the Minister is correct. I said, in round figures, &#x00A3;500. But even &#x00A3;520 is incorrect.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Quite so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>It is another instance of the danger of relying too much upon officials. Col. McArthur, I believe, had a pension on retirement of something like &#x00A3;750. I may be wrong in that, and I am open to correction. Of that he commuted a third and the state paid Col. McArthur &#x00A3;3,000 in a lump sum, and &#x00A3;500 in payment of his pension.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>It was &#x00A3;501 9s. 4d.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>At all events, the little mistake I made would not shut down the Union. I was &#x00A3;1 9s. 4d. out. The point is, it was sought from the Minister to mislead this House by understanding, very considerably indeed, the amount of pension that the chief engineer was getting. He got his full pension, I believe, for the salary he was receiving for his service, plus, of course, under the Natal law, the difference between the actual service he has given and his retiring age. He was getting, in fact, &#x00A3;750 pension. At the outset, you see, the Minister himself has been misled, and was, unfortunately, misled into misleading this House. If he was not misled then he deliberately misled this House. I ask the Minister not to shake his head. I am not going to make this a personal matter with him at all. I am not baiting the Minister. I have nothing whatever to do with the Minister as a person. I am regarding him as the ministerial head of the postal department, and I am satisfied from my pas: experience, and experience of officials within the post office to-day, that all is not well with the state of Denmark. I am urging upon him that he should enquire into it, and give his personal attention to it. I know that he cannot enquire into everything, so, in order to do this, I ask him to agree to the appointment of this commission to go into all the circumstances that I shall enumerate. I ask that this commission should examine the matter with no partiality whatsoever, and should make its recommendations to him to help him, and whatever experience I have will be placed at his disposal freely and unreservedly without any personal or political bias, in order that we might get a higher state of efficiency in a department with which I was closely associated for about four years. I must return to this question in order that the Minister shall not be under any misapprehension. The hon. member for Dundee asked the question whether Col. McArthur had resigned from the Department of Posts and Telegraphs. The reply was that Col. McArthur had asked to be retired on pension before the usual age. I am informed by Col. McArthur that that is not correct. He did not ask to be retired, but, as the result of the persecution which Col. McArthur had to endure, and to which he was subjected for many years past, he got so disgusted with the whole position that he intimated his readiness to retire if the Minister so desired. That is number one. He did not ask to be allowed to retire. Question number two was: &#x201C;What were his reasons, and who was appointed in his place, when was the appointment made, and at what salary&#x003F;&#x201D; That will come in later on, when I am dealing with the degrading of the post of engineer. The answer to the question &#x201C;What is the salary&#x003F;&#x201D; was that it was &#x00A3;1,210. The next question was, whether Col. McArthur draws a pension&#x003F; The answer was &#x201C;<i>Yes."</i> The next question was: &#x201C;What period did he serve before his pension was due&#x003F;&#x201D; The answer was: &#x201C;Two years and seven months.&#x201D; Hon. members must remember that that was added to his service for pension purposes. The next question was: &#x201C;What public money does he draw now &#x003F;&#x201D; The answer was literally correct. The question was, unfortunately worded, and it gave that clever and astute gentleman who draws up the answers to these questions for the Minister to fire off, the opportunity for the Minister to say it in the way he desires. The answer was that the pension was at the rate of &#x00A3;501 9s. 4d. per annum. In the light of the information I have given the House that statement is obviously incorrect, because the pension granted to him was &#x00A3;700 odd per annum, to which he was legally entitled, and of which he was allowed to commute one-third and get a lump sum payment of &#x00A3;3,000. All that was done was to capitalize a portion of his pension, but his actual pension was &#x00A3;750, or as near that sum as may be. So the Minister was put into the false position of having to inform the House that Col. McArthur was getting a pension of &#x00A3;501 9s. 4d., as though that was the only sum ever granted to him. The question was most unfortunately worded. It gave the gentleman concerned the opportunity of answering it in the way he desired. Do not let us beat about the bush. It was desired to inform the House that Col. McArthur is getting no other public monies beyond the &#x00A3;500.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>How can you say that?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>How many Ministers are there on this job&#x003F; I do not blame those brothers in misfortune, not for one single moment; I have a certain amount of sympathy with them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>A soft spot.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>No. There was a question of a lack of efficiency owing to an overlapping of the clerical and the technical or engineering sides of the department. What led to Col. McArthur&#x2019;s resignation was his &#x201C;fed-uppishness&#x201D; with this overlapping due to the <span class="col_2893-2894" refersTo="page_1519"/>lack of technical knowledge on the clerical side &#x2014; an understandable thing which should not be tolerated for one moment, and a constant hampering that he experienced from the clerical side in his efforts to improve the engineering side of the postal department. I will challenge anybody in this House or anyone in the engineering world to dare to say that Col. McArthur was not in the first flight of engineers in this country, more particularly can I say from my own experience&#x2014;and I will even call on the Minister of Labour to deny that he himself has not expressed himself to me personally and also on paper to Col. McArthur himself that it is a great pity that the latter found it necessary to sever his connection with the Minister in his technical capacity to the Defence Department over which the hon. gentleman reigns with such scintillating ability. It was a genuine testimonial&#x2014;Col. McArthur appreciated it, and I appreciated it, and it only bore out in part what I knew fully that Col. McArthur was a brilliant engineer of almost world-wide repute, and was thought a great deal of by both the British and the Australian post office departments. Easy as it might have been in the first place to divorce the clerical and engineering departments when both concerns were very small, it is all the more necessary now that they have grown to such tremendous proportions, especially on the engineering side. We have as an example the experience of the whole world, particularly the Continent, where the engineering side of communications has developed to a tremendous extent. Almost without exception leading countries have two separate departments&#x2014;not two separate departments under one departmental head, which I was quite prepared to institute, thus leaving the postmaster-general in supreme command&#x2014;not that, but two completely divorced departments, each with its own distinct head answerable only to the Minister. On the Continent that system obtains generally, and even in conservative England, where I suppose the postal department stands more than anything else for conservatism, a select committee of the House of Commons recommended to the Government that the time had arrived when an account of the tremendous growth of the engineering branch, and in order that there should be no hampering and that the telegraphs and telephones should advance without let or hindrance, the two departments should completely be divorced under a separate head, the Minister being the focussing point of the department. I did not ask for that when I was in the Cabinet, but I essayed to have this brought into being, not divorced from the postmaster-general but still under his direction. I regret very much to say now that I noticed evidences of intrigue of such a character as to prevent a Minister bringing in a reform when he found it to be necessary and that he was prevented by the intrigues of officials below him on the clerical or administrative side of the department. I give that to the Minister in all seriousness and good faith and with the best of good will. The Minister had better examine very carefully indeed the position of his department&#x2014;it is nothing to smile at and that is a very foolish way with which to deal with an indictment. I am not very much concerned with the personality of the Minister at all, and I do not think anybody else is, but I am giving him the benefit of my experience and if he thinks it is not worth anything that is for the world to judge, but I have the right to expect that he will take the advice in the spirit in which it is offered. I have a copy of the correspondence between Col. McArthur and the department which I will lend to any hon. member to read. The chief engineer complains not only of being hampered, but of a complete waste of money by reason of the fact that the clerical side of the department did not understand the position, particularly when it came to buying certain articles. He cites here in the first place the case of the purchase of insulators. It was about the war period and prices had soared, and without reference to him or the chief storekeeper orders were placed with a German firm&#x2014;that is nothing against it, of course&#x2014;for insulators far in excess of requirements without consultation with the chief engineer, the purchase being made on the ground that the British-made article was very much dearer at the time. He draws attention to the fact that there was a complete miscalculation, to say the least of it, because they were taking a German quotation of some weeks before the actual indent, although the prices were falling all the time, and the English insulators were very much cheaper at the time the German insulators were purchased. He says this is the direct result of not consulting with the chief engineer, who knows all about these things. I care not who he is; he has the training and general capacity, and is as much an administrative officer as any clerical man can be, with the superimposed qualification of knowing his engineering side as well, and dovetailing the two together which makes for efficiency. Something like 50 per cent, more insulators than were required were purchased, and the Treasury had to go into the matter, and they actually queried it. It is not the present Minister of Finance, so I am not getting at him. In addition to the extra cost per thousand they paid which they should not have paid, on examination by the chief engineer, he condemned every one of these insulators. That was one of the nails in his coffin. He protested that this was making for inefficiency and was wasting public money. If the Minister would only take the trouble to read this statement made by him, I am sure he will realize, whatever he has made up his mind to to, that it is absolutely essential to have an enquiry such as I am asking for. Then there was a question of the tremendous quantity of bridle wire bought without him and condemned because it would not stand up to the work. This system of running the post office is leading to this inefficiency. Like a thread woven through cloth is the personal objection of certain officials on the administrative side which has translated itself into obvious dislike of, and determination to get rid of, Col. <span class="col_2895-2896" refersTo="page_1520"/>McArthur, because he was a thorn in their side. To show you how inefficiency occurred, and developed, the department promoted clericals on the engineering side. I leave it to any professional man to say, from his wide knowledge of world affairs, whether it is not desirable to have a technical man in charge of technical matters, and not, be interfered with, sat upon and controlled by clerical men who, in the nature of things, can have very little knowledge of these matters. I have confidence in the point of view of these professional men. Very estimable men have been promoted in the telephone service. I know them very well, but I say they are round pegs in square holes, and should not have been promoted on the engineering side. The chief engineer has to take orders from clericals with regard to equipment and matters of a purely engineering character&#x2014;how they are to be done, where they are to be done, and what is to be done. It is a state of affairs that cannot commend itself to any man of affairs or who has any pretence to knowledge of how they should be run. The institution of exchanges was all decided by clerical men. Curt orders were given to the engineer to carry this or that out. There are numerous instances where, against his express advice, certain work was undertaken with the result that it could not stand up to the requirements. Is there not a case, on that alone, for an enquiry&#x003F; The engineer does not want to run the administrative side at all, and does not want to have anything to do with it, namely the postal side, but he has a right to run the engineering side administratively as well as technically because he combines the two branches of knowledge, and he is best able to do it in the interests of the country. He did several things to bring him into disrepute with the clerical side; he joined issue with the clerical side on the well-known instance where four men were incontinently retired from the postal service at a considerable financial loss to themselves, in one or two instances, and what for&#x003F; A post was abolished&#x2014;the Minister of Finance will be interested in this&#x2014;accompanied by increased payments by the state, however small it may be, and new posts were created and two posts were combined in one. It was apparently an economy, but I emphatically believe it was in order to make openings for certain friends of those in authority. This is not a political thing&#x2014;I hope the Minister will not think that for one moment at all. They were not politicians, but it was purely personal interest on the part of the officials for their own friends to get jobs. I will bring it down to one, whom I definitely refused to promote because I thought him incapable for the higher post. The Public Service Commission is not the right body to deal with these things at all; they have so little knowledge of them; it is all paper knowledge. I would rather that the Minister shoulders the responsibility all the time. What has happened&#x003F; The posts were scarcely instituted before it was found, as I myself indicated to the postmaster-general, that it was entirely unworkable for the two posts to be joined together under one head. I held that the business of the department would suffer, and that has been proved to be correct, and they have now got the two men in the two offices, but they do not happen to call the postmaster the postmaster. But the promotion was accomplished. My interest in this matter is only that of the State to-day. I am a member of Parliament, with an experience of official life, short as it was, and on that experience, which to me was very rich indeed, I am drawing, and giving the House and the country the benefit of it, for what it is worth, in order that some effort may be made to secure complete efficiency of a department which can be made remarkably efficient indeed. There is one other matter with regard to this engineering side to which I wish to refer, and which I am keenly anxious to bring before the House. All over the world they have, in postal departments, development control. The idea is to take a bird&#x2019;s eye view, not only of the present services, conditions and equipment, but of possible growths and of requirements in this or that direction, in short, a mapping out ahead of engineering developments, keeping up with the growth of the population. All over the world they have that, but all over the world it is in the hands of the engineering department, and I say that that argument cannot be gainsaid. The engineer is the man to carry out development study. Long past has gone the time when an engineer was only an engineer. The engineer to-day knows as much about administration, if not more, than a large number of people who have had their entire training in administration. What have they done&#x003F; They have a committee of these clericals who are studying, from an engineering point of view, what the development is likely to be, and shall be, and will be. It is a waste of public money, by reason of the fact that these things will not be done properly. Instances have occurred where the institution of telephones and other things has been more costly than it ought to have been, by reason of the fact that clericals control this development, and not the engineering staff. There is one other very important matter I wish to mention, and that is the question of the payment due to the Administration of something like &#x00A3;25,000 a year from the Beam Wireless Company of South Africa, due to underpayment of terminal charges. I am absolutely certain of the underlying influences after my 20 years&#x2019; experience of political life. I have seen how big finance can exert influence. These are things which are done by the Minister on the advice of officials. I am not attacking the Minister, but it a most extraordinary thing to me that this should take place. When I was Minister it was reported to me by Col. Mac-Arthur, who was acting postmaster-general at the time. He reported to me that the agreement made between the Government and the Beam Wireless Company of South Africa was not being adhered to, and that this was to the disadvantage of the department and the public of South Africa; that they were paying less <span class="col_2897-2898" refersTo="page_1521"/>terminal rates for their telegrams than they were supposed to, and, what is more, in making them that allowance, those responsible were actually breaking an Act of Parliament. In the agreement for beam messages from South Africa to England, the post office takes telegrams in. You write a message in the ordinary way and hand it over the counter, as though it was an ordinary telegram. The company controlling the beam has its tariff for messages fixed by the Government, by the postmaster-general, and in the agreement made between the Government&#x2014;and that agreement is only carrying out an Act passed by this House&#x2014;it is laid down what they shall pay to the Government for what are called &#x201C;terminal charges&#x201D;; that is, the sending of a telegram from any town in South Africa to the point where they transmit it by beam. The Act is specific, and the agreement is specific, and lays it down that the terminal rates shall be the ordinary telegraph rates of the country. I ask any hon. member of this House what they would understand by &#x201C;the ordinary telegraph rates&#x201D;&#x003F; You pay the ordinary telegraph rates. What do you pay&#x003F; A minimum of 1s. 3d. and every word after that, on the same message, is 1d. in addition. If you only send an address, you pay 1s. 3d. But what do we find&#x003F; By an interpretation of the former postmaster-general, endorsed by the present postmaster-general, these people are getting off with not that as the price, but with 1d. per word, and, as the vast bulk of messages really go from four to five or six words, you can understand that the difference between 6d. and 1s. 3d. is dead loss to the Union of South Africa. Col. McArthur discovered this immediately he assumed control of the administrative side, and informed me officially, and I instructed him to demand of the company that they should pay for the first year as the agreement said, and as the Act lays down. They resisted it. The Act provides that where there is any dispute, either side can demand arbitration, and they did so. We put up our arbitrator; we were facing the issue knowing that we would get the verdict. I was not content with merely taking the report of Col. McArthur; I used my own commonsense, and we went to the law adviser. The law adviser had been seen by somebody else, and he gave a judgment against us. Further information was sent&#x2014;I sent Col. McArthur to interview the law adviser&#x2014;the agreement was produced, and at once he said that we had a case, and we could go ahead. I went down personally to my friend and he agreed right up to the hilt that this company was doing us out of &#x00A3;25,000; of course, he did not agree as to the precise amount. I consulted him as a friend of the family. We were all satisfied that the company was doing us down. I came out of office; Col. McArthur was relegated to a back seat; arbitration proceedings were abandoned, and as a result South Africa is going to receive &#x00A3;25,000 less for terminal charges than it ought to be getting. This is something the House did not know of; something the House ought to know of; something that I hope that side of the House will regard as justifying the necessity of an enquiry being made into the matter by people competent to judge; people not likely to be swayed by influence. The desirability of establishing separate departments within this department I dealt with as part of the other matter. I do not want to keep the House. I could give innumerable examples, but in saying what I have said I hope hon. members will see that I have established a case for enquiry. I have not asked the House to convict anybody; I have not asked the House to say to the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs, &#x201C;You are no good; get out of it.&#x201D; I am only asking that a commission should be set up. Do not take what I say; do not take the Minister&#x2019;s reply; do not take anybody&#x2019;s, anything, but get somebody to enquire into the whole business who would express themselves without fear or favour as to the line to be adopted. After that, the Minister, or the Minister and his colleagues, can take the responsibility. Even if I cannot get the commission appointed I feel that I have done my duty.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#christie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHRISTIE</person>:</from>

<p>In seconding the motion of the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) I think both sides of the House should take into consideration that there is no suggestion of any political pull on either side, with regard to the facts as he has put them to the House. It is hoped that not only the Minister, but also his colleagues in the Cabinet, will not take up the attitude that because certain official acts are challenged, they must oppose any enquiry. From the point of view put forward by the hon. member for Benoni, he has emphasized right through that he is not concerned with and never has seen any political aspect of the question, but he has seen a division between different sides of the department&#x2014;a bureaucratic war in the department concerned, and I would love to see a bureaucratic war in every department to-day, because that would be the best way for the Government and the country to find out how little the Cabinet controls the administration of the various departments. That bureaucratic control has become so great and determined, that now you have bureaucratic differences, and bureaucratic wars. Out of evil shall come good, and out of such division as we have heard of to-day which probably exist in other departments, although they have not arrived at the same stage&#x2014;indicate the necessity for the fullest enquiry. It would appear from what the hon. member for Benoni has told us, that the clerical section and the engineering section of the department were moving forward with the intention that their view shall dominate the Department of Posts and Telegraphs, irrespective of the well-being of the department itself. They take up the position &#x201C;Either I must win, or the other fellow will make my position impossible.&#x201D; It appears that the engineering side lost and the <span class="col_2899-2900" refersTo="page_1522"/>clerical side won. We know that in commerce it has been an accepted principle for many years that the engineering section is complementary to the general manager&#x2019;s department, and the general manager&#x2019;s department complementary to the engineering section. Even on your steamships to-day you have that position. Whilst the captain is in supreme command of the ship, the engineer is entirely in charge of his section so far as the working of the engineering side is concerned. The one official&#x2019;s job is complementary to the other. Any pulling against each other would be a danger to the whole concern. Is that in the interests of the postal service&#x003F; Is it in the interests of the country that such a state of affairs has been progressing for some considerable time&#x003F; As far as I can see in connection with what my hon. friend has said, while the question of bureaucratic control is one that really comes out of all that part of it, and that part that I hope we shall hear something more of in the future, are we as a House and a country prepared to fight this question of officials, if they find that they have a chief who is responsible for Parliament and does not see eye to eye with them, and they will not be loyal to the outlook of that chief&#x003F; We realize all the more the danger that the country is in, if officials can arrive at a stage when they can secure such a position that we have heard of this afternoon. I was more concerned with the statement made that two contracts had been placed without the consent of the engineering department, wherein a large sum of money was lost in one case, and a large amount of goods bought which were entirely unsuitable and useless for their purpose in the other case. The first was a matter of insulators. I do not know anything about them. My hon. friend describes them as porcelain fittings. The insulators were bought at a much higher price than need have been paid for them. The second charge is that a large amount of wire was bought and was found to be useless for its purpose. If that is so, I think the Minister will admit that, apart from anything else, there is a case for enquiry. We must take the statement made in the House, and I hope that the Minister will go into it and agree that the enquiry committee asked for will be created, so that they can go into these points also. I will say this that it is news to me, it is an eye-opener to me, that this Beam company has been able to put &#x00A3;25,000 against this country, that they are legally chargeable for a sum of &#x00A3;25,000 per year, and they have got away with it. It is news to me that that position exists. If the agreement entered into between the Government of the Union of South Africa and the Beam company is, as indicated by the mover of this motion, namely, that as a result of the terminal charges being interpreted wrongly, interpreted to the interests of the Beam company, and wrongly, as advised by the law advisers, then I say it is wrong that the head of that department, that the Minister in charge of that department, and the Government itself, should allow that position to continue. To say that a big company like that is getting away with &#x00A3;25,000 per year which legitimately belongs to the State, is a state of affairs that no political party can stand for, and no Government can stand for. The suggestion that may be made that this is an attack upon the Government is one which cannot hold water. I myself have supported the Government side right up to about 18 months ago, and until just a little before the last general election I have never heard about a thing like this. I am equally satisfied that when we sat there, if it had been brought to our notice, and we had gone to our Nationalist colleagues and put that position to them they would have agreed equally with us that it must be a thing to be put right and that the Government must see that justice is done. This is not a question of a political issue. It is not a question even of the administration by the Minister of that department. It is not even a suggestion that the administration is wrong from the point of view as he sees it, but it is to show that there is something of an undercurrent in his department that he himself is not aware of. It is an under-current of which each Minister is not aware of. It is a state of affairs that the Government of the country has not been fully aware of, but now the position has been put clearly before them, before this House and before the country. I submit that the case put forward by the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) indicates first that there is no question of a political issue. Secondly, there is no question, so far as the Minister himself is concerned, with regard to his intentions or his outlook. Surely, it shows that there has been a bureaucratic practice. There has been gross inefficiency in the purchase of certain articles and, in one case, at a price much higher than should have been paid, and in the other case, the purchase of an article that was entirely useless for the purposes for which it had been bought. Finally, it shows that there is a contract in existence between the Union of South Africa and a private concern which would entitle the Government of the Union to &#x00A3;25,000 over a period of two or three years and during years to come, that is not being paid to the Government. I think that is an indictment of things underneath in connection with which we are entitled to an enquiry. This country is also entitled to have these things enquired into. I am not anticipating how the Minister may receive this motion, for I do not know. But the vote of this House against the motion of my hon. friend is not going to dispose of these things. A vote of this House against this motion, turning it down, will not dispose of it, not by a long way. There are members on both sides of the House who have heard this afternoon things that we have never heard before. It might almost make us feel that it would be a good thing if we could get a little more of the inner history of the workings of the departments whereby in the future we would be fully alive to the danger that every <span class="col_2901-2902" refersTo="page_1523"/>political party is faced with when it takes office, namely, the desire of officialdom and bureaucrats to filch from the duly elected of the people that power that the people believe they have given to a certain party.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) at the beginning of his speech said he had no desire to bait the Minister, and I fully appreciate that that was not his intention in bringing forward this motion. I am quite sure, however, that in his own mind he considers he has delivered a slashing attack on the administration of the post office, and that his motion&#x2014;he has made no secret of it&#x2014; was designed for the purpose of attacking the administration of the post office. In his attack on the post office, he said he found in that department a tremendous amount of friction, and he plunged into past history relating to the purchase of unsuitable insulators and wire that gave rise to this friction. But all the time he was Minister of Posts and Telegraphs and noticed that the officials were not pulling together, what steps did he take to remedy this&#x003F; Did he appoint a commission to enquire into the matter&#x003F; Now, however, as a distinterested spectator, as he calls himself, he asks Parliament to do so. I want to assure him that when I first came into office, I found a lot of friction inside the department, but I defy any hon. member to point to any friction that exists in the department at the present time. It must be plain to the House that this is because the cause of the previous friction has been removed. I certainly had a good deal of difficulty at the beginning in trying to get the officials to work together. It was clearly the hon. member&#x2019;s duty as a Minister, if he knew of all these things, to have taken proper steps at the time to see that they were remedied. His motion is very comprehensive, but three parts of it have no relationship to the administration of the postal department; (a), (b) and (d) all refer to matters of organization and promotion, and Parliament in its wisdom, or otherwise, has under statute relegated these matters to the Public Service Commission and that is the proper body to deal with these particular things. If their recommendations are wrong there is a need, not to enquire into the administration of the post office, but into the work of the Public Service Commission to see if it is not doing its work correctly. I do not want, however, to evade any of the points the hon. member has brought forward. In the first place, when I answered a question in this House a little time since, I told the House that Col. McArthur left the service voluntarily and at his own request. At the only interview I had with him I expressed the hope that he and others would do their best to allay the friction that existed in the department. I never saw him again, but many months after that I was shown a letter he had written asking to be retired from the department. I saw that letter with my own eyes, and I ask my hon. friend to believe that I read it. Of course, it was the duty of the department itself once the Public Service Commission had agreed to Col. McArthur&#x2019;s retirement, to give effect to that recommendation, which it did. The post was filled&#x2014;not the same post, for the department took advantage of the opportunity of his retirement to reorganize the engineering branch in a direction they had favoured for some time. That brings me to another matter. Apparently the policy of the past has been to refer every little tin-pot question relating to the engineering department to headquarters, and the consequence was that a headquarter staff had grown up altogether beyond what was needed. Matters that could easily be left to our divisional engineers, who receive high salaries&#x2014;matters which they were thoroughly competent to deal with&#x2014;were referred to headquarters. Advantage has been taken of Col. McArthur&#x2019;s retirement to reorganize the department, which has resulted in a large degree of increased efficiency, and at the moment, a small economy which is reflected in the estimates. The hon. member tried to prejudice me against the officials by saying they hid things from me. I should never hesitate&#x2014; and the hon. member ought to know me well enough to be aware that if I saw anything of that kind in the department I should not close my eyes to it&#x2014;to demand satisfaction. The hon. member tried to poison my mind against my officials by saying that it was his experience that the officials were always trying to mislead him, and that they had also tried to mislead me in regard to the answer given to a question replied to in this House. Well, the department through myself categorically answered the question asked by the hon. member for Dundee (Mr. Friend). I was given supplementary information so that if a supplementary question were asked as to whether the pension was all the moneys Col. McArthur received I should be in a position to answer that question. The question asked was what public money does Col. McArthur get, and the answer was a pension of &#x00A3;501 per year. The further information supplied to me was that Col. McArthur has commuted one-third of his pension for the sum of &#x00A3;2,890, and this &#x00A3;501 represented a pension on the two-thirds remaining. I have not found any instances where, if officials have been treated fairly and have been asked questions, they have failed to give me proper information. The next point was with regard to the system and methods of promotion. The hon. member knows quite well from his own experience that these are matters obviously for the Public Service Commission to deal with, but I notice that all along he has differed on that point, holding that the Minister should decide these matters, but the law has laid down that these are duties which the Public Service Commission should perform. I entirely disagree with him, and I do not know what we should come to in this country without the Public Service Commission. I wonder what state the public service would be in if there were not a commission to adjudicate on these matters, and if these things were left to the Minister of each department to determine. Personally, I think this commission is not only necessary in the interests of the public, but I think public <span class="col_2903-2904" refersTo="page_1524"/>servants will agree with me when I say it is necessary in their interests as well that these matters should be relegated to the commission. You cannot have it both ways&#x2014;to relegate it to the commission, and to give the Minister a free hand, as the hon. member thinks he should have had when he was in office. He has dealt with what he calls the underpayment by the wireless company in South Africa to the Government for services rendered. I will go a little deeper into this matter, so that hon. members may thoroughly understand it. I can speak only from the facts as I have found them. In 1923 Parliament passed an Act in the schedule of which was an agreement which allowed a company to set up a high-power wireless station in South Africa. Terms and conditions were laid down in that agreement, the capital to be raised by the company, and so forth, how they were to perform the service, the rates to be charged to the public, and the recompense which the Government had to receive from the company for the transmission of messages inland. The agreement states that this amount shall be subject to the usual charges made for inland telegrams, which, as hon. members know, is 12 words for 1s. 3d. It is the same now as it was then. The minimum is 1s. 3d. That obviously is not in accordance with the advice tendered at the time by the department that the charge should be a penny a word. The interpretation the department has placed on those words from the beginning, and there is plenty of proof on that point&#x2014;was that the rate was to be 1d. per word&#x2014;the same rate as they charged the cable company, and in accordance with the international postal agreements under which they are not allowed to charge one company more than another, or to differentiate. Furthermore, the department, from the very beginning of the service, charged 1d. per word. There is no doubt what their intention was, or their interpretation of the words, they were to charge only 1d. per word.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person></from>

<p>interjected a remark.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>I quite agree a mistake was made there in a strict legal sense, but the law does not compel them to charge more. In the mind of the company, of the postmaster-general, almost universally the intention was clear to charge only 1d. per word, in regard to the transmission of those messages inland. Anyway, they started off in this way. Hon. members will remember quite well that when the aerials of the high-power station had been erected, and some &#x00A3;60,000 had been spent, radio-telegraphy had been so improved by inventions that the old idea of a high-power scheme was abandoned with the permission, I presume, of the Government, and again with the consent of the Government, the company was permitted to erect a radio station costing only about one-fifth of the original station.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Radio was the original; they invented the beam.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Beam means the same thing as radio. The original agreement was therefore departed from, and when the company had put up their station and began to operate, they did so under a temporary permit issued in terms of the Post Office Act&#x2014;not the 1923 Act, which referred to a totally different thing, a high-power station. I think legally the Act is defunct and does not exist, because a departure from it was acquiesced in, and because there is no penalty in it for non-compliance. With regard to the new station, permission was given to the company to work this under a temporary permit, which incorporated the conditions of the original agreement as far as rates and charges, expropriation, and other obligations of the company were concerned. The company started to receive and transmit messages, and we forwarded them inland, and charged the sum originally intended, viz., 1d. per word, which is the same charge that we have made for 25 years to the cable company. While the postmaster-general was overseas about two years ago, the hon. member has to-day told us, the chief engineer pointed out to him the discrepancy between what we were charging and what was laid down in the 1923 Act, and immediately the hon. member set machinery in motion to lay a claim to the difference in the amount. I wish to point out to the House that, although the 1926 Radio Act had been passed, the company were still compelled to carry on under a temporary licence given from time to time by the postmaster-general, and until I gave orders to stop the work, about &#x00A3;1,000 had been expended in trying to ascertain what the difference was between the two charges. I think it was an unwarranted expenditure of public money. The company resisted the claim, and pointed out that the practice had been in existence from the commencement, and that the department had never made the claim before.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>What about the auditor-general?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>The auditor-general does not appear to have been aware of this matter as far as I can learn. There was a provision in the original agreement to the effect that in the event of a dispute occurring as to rates or other matters, the dispute had to be submitted to arbitration, and the company, who resisted the claim, asked for arbitrators to be appointed. It was at that juncture I came on the scene as Minister. I went through the papers, legal opinions, and things of that sort, and there were three outstanding points which impressed me. The first was this: that it was as clear as daylight that from the very beginning of the working of the wireless the whole department from top to bottom has been under the impression that the intention was to charge the same for the transmission of wireless telegrams as had been charged for cable telegrams. The second point that impressed me was that all the legal advice tendered to the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) as Minister, showed that if it had <span class="col_2905-2906" refersTo="page_1525"/>been a simple matter of this clause in the agreement going before a court for an interpretation of the clause apart from the surrounding circumstances and intentions, then it was obvious that the court could be expected to give a verdict in favour of the Government, but as the matter had to go to arbitration, arbitrators would not divorce that clause from the rest of the agreement, and surrounding circumstances and universal practice, and there was not much likelihood of the Government claim being successful. The third point was that even if we gained the verdict the company would, as they threatened, reimburse themselves from the pockets of the public, so that no good public end could be served by taking the money out of one pocket and putting it into another. Furthermore, if it was as claimed that 1d. a word sufficed to pay the department for the service rendered, there seemed no great point gained by increasing the charge for messages. Those were the points that impressed me, but for the time being I left the matter where it was. We were asked to appoint arbitrators, and in due course to notify who our arbitrators were to be. When we came to Cape Town the state attorney came down and began to prepare his evidence. He interviewed officials as to what were the intentions, not the intentions of the late Minister or myself, but the intentions of the officials who advised the Government at that time, and he came to me and advised me that he had no real case to go to arbitration with. If it was a matter that he could take to a court, he said it would then be a different matter, but in regard to arbitration on the question of the interpretation of this agreement, in the light of what was the intention at the time the agreement was made, then he felt sure we had no case. Acting on that advice, we withdrew our claim, and shortly after, acting under Section 5 of the Radio Act, we were able to issue the licence to the company under which they work at the present time. The principal conditions of the previous temporary licence were repeated in that licence and we also made the position perfectly clear as to what the charges were to be in future.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>One penny a word.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, the same as the cable company. We have no right as a member of the International Postal Union to differentiate between one service and the other. The hon. member has dealt with his pet idea of separating the postal from the engineering branch of the service. He speaks from his own particular knowledge in these matters, but I have, or think it best, to follow, more or less, the advice of people who are expected to tender Ministers competent advice. I see no necessity for having two departments in water-tight compartments, so that they can never come into contact. It seems to me that the engineering branch, the telegraphs and telephones, and the postal side, should be in the closest co-operation with each other. Once you start this idea of public utility services being divided into a number of branches, with heads of these branches who may differ as to methods and policy, you are on the road to friction, and friction must eventually take place. Then who is to decide&#x003F; I can only think that the friction of which the hon. member has complained, but which is non-existent in the post office to-day, began at the time the hon. member conceived this idea of dividing the department. I hope that, as Minister, I am not going to be placed in the same unenviable position. I see no need for reorganization. The hon. member has made out no case for it. In regard to three parts of this resolution the matters mentioned are those which the Public Service Commission have been appointed to deal with. If the hon. member has advice with regard to these matters he desires to tender to the Public Service Commission, let him do so. The hon. member has dived, to some extent, into the past, but he has brought forward no evidence to justify the enquiry he has asked for, and I hope the House will reject the motion. I would also like to add that I resent very much the hon. member&#x2019;s attack on the officials of the postal department. I have sat in this House as many years as he has, and I must say that as, an onlooker, and as one who has been more recently in closer contact with the department, I have always thought that the postal service of this country is most efficiently run. I see no fault to find with it. I hear no complaint from this House of the administration of the post office, and I hear no complaints outside, except, of course, those little faults and mistakes which are common to all humans. I do not think the hon. member is fair in attacking a set of officials behind their backs in a place where they cannot reply.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>This has been going on ever since Union, and, like the hon. Minister I came in and found it going on and found that it was doing harm to the service. The hon. Minister has discharged an honest official who was doing his best in the interests of the department&#x2014;or rather he has removed him and de-graded the other men and in effect told them that if they are not very careful they will go too. He has laid down conditions and regulations under which they cannot do anything. He has laid it down that the postmaster-general is the boss of everything. The hon. Minister said that this gentleman asked to be retired. He goes on to say [letter read]. Of course, one would expect the Minister to adopt that attitude. As I indicated right at the beginning he is content to sit in his chair and rubber stamp anything that comes up from the administrative side. I was rather sorry to have the Minister turn on me in that ferocious way of his when I tried to correct a little mistake he had made. Not only did he refuse to accept my correction but he emphasized his mistake. He had the whole thing topsy turvey. He said radio came in after the Act, and when I suggested he meant Beam he turned on me like a wolfhound. I was perfectly genuine in my remarks. He says that I have attacked officials behind their backs when they cannot defend themselves. I have <span class="col_2907-2908" refersTo="page_1526"/>heard that before in this House. Hon. members must not bring up matters of this kind because they are attacking administrative officials behind their backs, although the official is looking at you all the time. I say if that is so then we are getting to a pretty pass. I take it it is the business of hon. members when they know things are not being done correctly&#x2014;when there is something going on that should not be&#x2014; to bring the matter before the House if they cannot get redress in any other way. The hon. Minister says he sees no fault in his department. No, he simply knows what he is told; he will never find out anything in his department; it may be he simply does not know where he is. He said that the friction in the department was not evident until I started it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know when it started.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Do you accuse me of starting the trouble?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know what you did; you know better than I do.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Is that asking to be retired&#x003F; Nothing of the sort. He merely made it clear that he was not to be considered and that the enquiry was to go on as though he did not exist. The hon. Minister made one mistake&#x2014;he made many mistakes&#x2014;but he made one particular mistake in saying that we have no right to differentiate between two persons as to charges. Why on the Ream question one of the complaints of the Beam company in Canada was that they had to pay excessive terminal charges. The hon. Minister&#x2019;s contention does not hold water at all. We can make what charges we like to the cable company and the Beam company. I agreed as Minister&#x2014;or rather Mr. Boydell agreed originally&#x2014;to allow them to experiment with the Beam question, but said we would insist on a high power radio system and I took up the same standpoint; and they were working under a temporary licence. I ask the hon. Minister if one penny a word has now been made perfectly clear to the company, and he said &#x201C;Yes.&#x201D; I asked the hon. Minister has he given them a licence, and for what period?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Seven years to go.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Then the hon. Minister is acting illegally in accenting that Beam system unless he comes to this House for permission to amend the Act.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Read your Radio Act of 1926.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>That has nothing to do with it. That is broadcasting, and has nothing to do with international communication. It has nothing to do with the Act introduced by the right hon. member for Standerton in this House. The hon. Minister is acting illegally in doing anything of the sort without amending the Act already in existence. The hon. Minister says the Government attorney came here and interviewed officials and as a result he found it impossible to go to arbitration. Of course the officials themselves made an interpretation and that is one of the contentions of the hon. member for Langlaagte (Mr. Christie). Officials have been insisting on policy for the hon. Minister to pursue. The very fact that the Minister has given them their licence for seven years at a penny a word shows that he has no wish to safeguard the interests of the public and that all he was concerned with was satisfying the wireless company. He uses this extraordinary argument. He said that if we made the company pay 1s. 3d. for their telegrams, they would reimburse themselves from the public. Is that not an extraordinary argument&#x003F; I have never heard anything like it. He has control, under the Act, of the rates that they shall charge. If they are allowed to reimburse themselves, out of the pockets of the public, his would be the fault. The charges are to be laid down by him and by nobody else, not by the company. The company has to charge the rates that the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs lays down. In the first six months of working under them, on a temporary licence, because I refused to give them a permanent licence, they were making over &#x00A3;3,000 a month clear profit. Now, they have five directors&#x2014;I think they have more, but I know of five, and they are each paid &#x00A3;2,000 a year.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Who pays that &#x00A3;2,000 a year&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>The Wireless Company. Does not the Minister know that?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>How do you know it&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>How do I know it&#x003F;&#x2014; &#x00A3;2,000 a year each !</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>How do you get that&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>It is published. They are getting &#x00A3;10,000 a year, and they were making &#x00A3;3,000 a month clear profit in the first six months of working. That is going on, and the Minister uses the argument that if you make them pay 1s. 3d. for a message, they will reimburse themselves from the public. The Minister is the man who controls the rates that they have to charge, and they have to pay. If they can make all that profit, out of the first six months of working, out of the charges made, they can easily afford to pay a right and just charge. The initial mistake was made by the officials. But is that any reason why we should perpetuate that mistake?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Why exploit it&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I am not going to exploit it, but I know what the Act intended.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from><span class="col_2909-2910" refersTo="page_1527"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>How do you know?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I remember the Act itself.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>You did not frame it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>No, the hon. member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) framed it. I will tell the Minister how the mistake arose. It arose in this way. At the time that the Bill was drafted, the charge for telegrams did not include the surcharge of 3d. That was a war measure. It was a penny per word with a minimum of one shilling. That was intended, and it was interpreted in another way. The mistake was made by the department. The charge that the Government intended was a minimum of one shilling, and whatever other charges might be made. The Postal Department might have to impose other charges. That was why ft was put in that way. The Bill was discussed very keenly indeed. The Minister says that, as a result of my intrusion, when he came into office, he found a large number of accountants trying to get the thing up to date.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>I did not say a &#x201C;large number,&#x201D; but I found men at work.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want to misrepresent the hon. Minister. He said there was a sum of &#x00A3;1,000.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Which was already spent and wasted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Wasted&#x003F; Of course it was wasted, in the light of the policy of the Minister now. It would never have been wasted if my policy had been carried out, and instead of getting &#x00A3;25,000 less &#x00A3;1,000 which is &#x00A3;24,000, they would have been getting nothing at all. That is the objection to the department itself. They should have kept their records up to date. That is one of the complaints. It was a question of how many messages had gone in and out, and it was a simple arithmetical sum to find out exactly how much money we had demanded. It was the department itself that was at fault and not me. He says in reply to my statement in regard to the motion that the method of promotion was referred entirely to the Public Service Commission. I though the policy had been altered. I think hon. members on this side of the House will remember that was not the way it was done. Every promotion is first submitted by the head of the department to the Public Service Commission, and that is where all the difficulty occurs. Let me say that there could be no more heartburning or ill-feeling on the part of officials in the department if you did away with the Public Service Commission. There would be no more than there is now. You have a host of dissatisfied, yet clever, officials and honest officials, who want to give their ability to the service of the department, and are anxious to serve, but are kept back, because they are outside that ray of light which flows from the throne on which the Minister sits somewhat supinely. That is a fact. He misleads the House into the belief that the Public Service Commission incepts the promotions. It does not. The head of the department does that, and sends them to the Public Service Commission, and generally, the Public Service Commission agrees. Sometimes they find fault with them. However, I do not want to prolong the discussion at all. I do not think the Minister has replied sufficiently well to my initiatory speech as to knock down the case I have made. The only thing that emerges from his remarks is that the Government generally have surrendered to the influence of the Wireless Company, which is, in the ultimate, Marconi, who is getting a grip on the wireless communications not only all over the Empire, but practically throughout the world, and is only resisted by the large American combination which exists to-day, and the Minister has played his rather ignoble part in surrendering the communications of this country to the Marconi company which is out to get a grip of us and has entirely succeeded.</p>

<p>Motion put and the House divided:</p>

</speech>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;14.</p>

<p>Bowen, R. W.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>De Wet. W. F.</p>

<p>Faure, P. A. B.</p>

<p>Friend, A.</p>

<p>Hockly. R. A.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Pocock, P. V.</p>

<p>Wares, A. P. J.</p>

<p>Waterson, S. F.</p>

<p>Tellers: Giovanetti, C. W.; Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;69.</p>

<p>Alberts, S. F.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bekker, J. F. van G.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Bremer, K.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Chiappini, A. J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>De Jager, H. J. C.</p>

<p>De Sousa, E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers. W. B.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Du Toit, C. W. M.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, M. S. W.</p>

<p>Du Toit, P. P.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, C. H.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Haywood, J. J.</p>

<p>Jansen, E. G.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Lamprecht, H. A.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pirow, O.</p>

<p>Potgieter, C. S. H.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. V. W.</p>

<p>Roberts, F. J.</p>

<p>Robertson, G. T.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Shaw, F.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steyn, G. P.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strydom, J. G.</p>

<p>Sturrock, F. C.</p>

<p>Swanepoel, A. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Coller, C. M.</p>

<p><span class="col_2911-2912" refersTo="page_1528"/>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Verster, J. D. H.</p>

<p>Visser, W. J. M.</p>

<p>Vorster, W. H.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Wentzel, L. M.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Wolfaard, G. van Z.</p>

<p>Tellers: Malan, M. L.; Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly negatived.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_h._sobey">

<heading>PETITION H. SOBEY.</heading>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition of H. Sobey, of Rosebank (Cape), a signalman, South African Railways; praying for consideration of his case and for relief, presented to this House on the 1th February, 1930, be referred to the Government for consideration.</block>

<p>I have not a grave indictment to bring against the Government, like my hon. friend has. A man named H. Sobey joined the Cape service in 1906. He was a signalman at Germiston in 1914, when the strike broke out, and while riding to his work on a motor-cycle&#x2014;which I personally think was a very foolish thing to do, when a strike was in progress&#x2014;he met with an accident and was off duty from January 14 to January 29. When he returned to duty, he was treated by the administration as if he had been on strike, and consequently was not re-employed. He then went on active service, and when he returned he was re-admitted to the railway service as a new entrant. Later on his break in service was condoned, but for pension purposes only, so that for all other purposes he has been regarded as a man who went on strike. He petitioned the select committee on pensions, and while they sympathized with him, they said his case was quite outside their purview, and now he asks, having exhausted all other means, that the petition be referred to the Government for its consideration. He has three doctors&#x2019; sertificates to prove that during the period he was absent from duty he was actually injured. He was unable to resume his duties. Whether he intended to go on strike, I do not know&#x2014; he says he did not. Another point is that immediately he got his injury, he in conformity with the regulations notified the head of the department, or his superior officer, that he had been injured, and sent a copy of the doctor&#x2019;s certificate to him. Not only that, but it appears that a grave error was made as this man was on the old Cape fixed establishment and his conditions of service was controlled by Act 32 of 1895. He was, however, dealt with as though his condition of service was under the Act of 1912. He should have been tried under the regulations of the old Cape civil service. Take it all in all, this man has fairly had a grievance. As far as I am informed, he is a capable officer, there are juniors in the service who have been put right over him, and he is occupying a minor position, because it is reckoned against him that in 1914 he was considered a striker. He has stated to me that if only he was given an opportunity of stating his case, before any tribunal, even a court, he would be able to prove from the medical documents that he was in the doctor&#x2019;s hands, and was suffering from an injury, and that he was not on strike. He is a persistent man, because he has been getting at probably more than half the members of the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#potgieter">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">POTGIETER</person></from>

<p>seconded the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I have been requested by the Minister of Railways and Harbours to say he is prepared to accept the motion without, of course, committing the administration in any way. We do not want it to be considered from the acceptance of the motion that there is any probability of the decision which has been arrived at being reconsidered.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I am not going to oppose the motion, but I want to draw attention to the fact that recently I asked a question. It was on the 21st of March, when I asked the Minister of Finance&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">(1) What are the names of the petitioners, whose petitions were presented to this House since 1925, asking for relief, and which were referred to the Government for consideration; and (2) what was the decision of the Government in each case.</block>

<p>To this the Minister of Finance replied&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">As no record is kept of the petitions, referred to my department for consideration, it is not possible to furnish the desired information.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>What a discovery !</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I was prevented from going further on receiving that answer, which was most unsatisfactory. Since I have been in this House, from 1910 onwards, a large number of petitions have been received and referred to the Government for consideration. I consider it is in the interests of the country that whenever a petition of this nature is referred to the Government, the House should be advised and given an opportunity of discussing whether the Government acted wisely or not in that particular case. From this answer it is impossible to learn what the Government has done in any particular case. I maintain the first duty of a member of Parliament is to act in the interests of the country, and I maintain furthermore, that when I asked this question I was not prompted by being merely inquisitive, but I was actuated by that first duty of an hon. member, which I mentioned. The Minister has made it impossible for any hon. member to make this enquiry. It is incredible that no such record is kept. I ask for the sympathy of the House. It is the bounden duty of the Government to keep a record. We pay Ministers and staffs, and the country is run at an expenditure of some &#x00A3;31,000,000 per annum, to deal only with the financial side and not the railway side. Are we to sit under this indignity <span class="col_2913-2914" refersTo="page_1529"/>&#x003F; I consider it is not only an insult to me, but to the House and to the country. I would like to know what language the Minister would have used had he been sitting here, and I had been guilty of the conduct of which he has been guilty. The Minister is treating this House with levity. It is monstrous.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_r._leaver">

<heading>PETITION R. LEAVER.</heading>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition of R. Leaver, of Cape Town, praying for compensation in respect of the financial losses sustained by him since 1917 owing to his failure, owing to the action of the Government, to establish a nicotine industry in South Africa, or for other relief, presented to this House on the 7th February, 1930, be referred to the Government for consideration.</block>

<p>I am almost afraid to introduce this after the speech of the hon. gentleman just now. If the result is, after the petition is referred to the Government, that it is lost sight of, we are losing time. I hope in this case the Minister will keep a record, and rather create a record by going into this matter, and a further one by giving this motion the consideration it deserves. Mr. Leaver is well known. All that the House requires is to have its memory refreshed, and I am going to refresh it only on one or two points. Mr. Leaver has a great interest in trying to establish a nicotine industry, but owing to official representations, so he alleges, made by members of the Agricultural Department, he lost credit, or lost cast, so to speak. He lost money, and it is with respect to this loss of money that this gentleman is asking Parliament to intervene. The amount lost directly and indirectly is &#x00A3;5,000, and he has asked me to ask the Minister of Finance to urge upon his colleagues to agree to the payment of this amount as compensation. There is a good deal in his contention. He desires compensation for the harm that the Government department did him according to his allegation. But it goes further than that. Here is a man who was helping to start an industry which would have been of immense value, and which provided a very fine opening for by-products from one section of the farming industry, the tobacco industry. Such a thing would have been of immense value at the present time because of the difficulty now being experienced in disposing of our tobacco crop. It is well known that the selling of tobacco has become a very close preserve. A monopoly has got hold of it. The United Tobacco Company decides what a farmer shall sell, how much he shall sell, and what price shall be paid for it Any industry or enterprise which would help the tobacco farmer, and which would not be associated with the United Tobacco Company, would be of great value. Seeing that it was the intervention of a Government department that quite wrongfully and untruthfully depreciated the standard of our tobacco, and caused this gentleman the loss complained of, I hope the motion will be agreed to, and that the matter will be gone into by the Government and that Mr. Leaver will receive some compensation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#christie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHRISTIE</person>:</from>

<p>I second the motion. I hope the Minister will treat this motion in the same way he has treated the previous one. He need not give any undertaking.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry that the hon. member for Yon Brandis (Mr. Nathan) was dissatisfied with the answer I gave to a question he put to me. I hope he has duly impressed the House with the reasons given for his indignation, but he has not impressed me. The hon. member complains because I told him that the Government did not keep a record of the number of motions referred to it from time to time for consideration.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. the Minister cannot deal with a matter arising out of a previous debate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask that the Minister be allowed to continue?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>As far as the present motion is concerned, I believe the facts are well known to most hon. members. It has been debated in this House on many occasions. I understand that the grievance of this gentleman has got the sympathy of hon. members, but the stumbling block is that he has not yet got the sympathy of the Minister of Finance. No good purpose will be served in accepting the motion that the matter be considered again by the Government. It has been considered by the Government previously. It is for this House to express its opinion on the question, whether they desire me to pay this claim or not. I am sorry that up to now even on the merits it cannot be reasonably expected that the department through giving expression to certain opinions at the time should be held responsible for having caused the loss complained of. I cannot be expected to pay the compensation desired even on the grounds that the loss was so caused, if that were admitted. I can give no hope, if the House passes this motion, that we will be able to do anything. I think the House should face the question, and let Mr. Leaver know where he stands. He has told me on several occasions that I am the only stumbling block to the payment of compensation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I am afraid that that is hardly a fair way to put it, that the House should face the question and decide whether this gentleman should be paid compensation or not. The Minister has said that he is not going to accept the motion. Having said that, he calls upon his followers to vote solid without any reference to the merits of the case. If the Minister had said: &#x201C;Let the House decide, and I will be bound by the decision,&#x201D; then there would be something in it, but when the Minister says: &#x201C;I cannot accept the motion,&#x201D; and then tells the House to face it, it <span class="col_2915-2916" refersTo="page_1530"/>is not a fair position. What can one do&#x003F; The merits go by the board, and the case cannot be considered. I am satisfied from the enquiries I have made that Mr. Leaver has quite a good claim, but what on earth is the good of establishing a claim when the Minister, with a brick-wall majority behind him, appeals to that majority saying that this gentleman should not get compensation. All one can do is to express sincere regret and decide to give further consideration, not to the case itself&#x2014;I am speaking personally&#x2014;but to machinery for once again bringing it before the House in such a form that it can receive attention, but not under the present circumstances which are inimical to any justice being done.</p>

<p>Motion put and negatived.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1930-04-08T17:16:00">5.16 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

