---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - TUESDAY 28 JANUARY 1930'
layout: debate
year: 1930
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 28th JANUARY, 1930.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took, the Chair at <recordedTime time="1930-01-28T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading><span class="col_123-124" refersTo="page_0130"/>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Magistrates&#x2019; Salaries.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether, in view of his statement last session (Hansard, vol. 13, pages 580-581) that he intended giving serious consideration to the possibility of improving the position of the magistrates of the Union, he can inform the House that provision will be made for increasing their emoluments and providing a number of posts better paid than at present &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The scheme under consideration was a reorganization of districts by placing, for judicial purposes, several existing magisterial districts under one magistrate of a higher grade. The scheme is still being investigated.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Ministers Plenipotentiary.</heading>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_external_affairs">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. COULTER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of External Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What are the terms of the British notes to the Italian, Dutch and American Governments accrediting Union Ministers Plenipotentiary to those Governments; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will lay copies of those notes upon the Table&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_external_affairs" to="#coulter">

<from>The MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>(1) and (2) After consultation between the various Governments of the British commonwealth, agreement was reached as to the form of note to be addressed to Foreign Governments regarding the proposed appointment of dominion Ministers Plenipotentiary. A specimen note is hereby laid on the Table of the House. Such a note would ordinarily be addressed by his Majesty&#x2019;s diplomatic representative in the country concerned to the Minister in charge of the foreign affairs of that country.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Russia, Relations with.</heading>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_external_affairs">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. COULTER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of External Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Union Government was consulted by the Imperial Government with reference to the renewal of diplomatic relations with the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics; if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether the Union Government made any stipulation designed to restrict the propaganda of that State within the Union, and, if so, in what terms;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Union Government in particular insisted that it would hold the Government of Russia responsible for any propaganda conducted within the Union by the Third Communist International; and</li>

<li>(4) whether the Union Government is in possession of any evidence that any such propaganda has been conducted within the Union in the last three years, and, if it is, whether the Government is prepared to publish the particulars thereof &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_external_affairs" to="#coulter">

<from>The MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) His Majesty&#x2019;s Government in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland have kept the Union Government fully informed of all steps taken in connection with the renewal of diplomatic relations with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and have consulted the Union Government in so far as the interests of the Union were affected.</li>

<li>(2) No agreement has been concluded between the Union Government and the Soviet Government. What happened is as follows: Article 16 of the General Treaty signed on the 8th of August, 1924, between Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, contains the following provisions&#x2014;</li>

</ol>

<block name="quote">The contracting parties solemnly affirm their desire and intention to live in peace and amity with each other, scrupulously to respect the undoubted right of a State to order its own life within its own jurisdiction in its own way, to refrain and to restrain all persons and organizations under their direct or indirect control, including organizations in receipt of any financial assistance from them, from any act overt or covert liable in any way whatsoever to endanger the tranquility or prosperity of any part of the territory of the British empire or the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or intended to embitter the relations of the British empire or the Union with their neighbours or any other countries.</block>

<p>In an exchange of notes between his Majesty&#x2019;s Government in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the Soviet Government the undertaking of this article was confirmed and stated to be regarded as having full force and effect as between themselves. On the occasion of this exchange of notes and in a separate note verbal, the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics gave ha undertaking that they considered the provisions of Article 16 as extending also., i.a., to the Union of South Africa and expressed their willingness to repeat this undertaking, on the basis of reciprocity, in a separate exchange of notes with, i.a., the Union Government, as soon as the latter shall have regulated its relations with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The Soviet Government was thereupon notified in the same manner, through the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, that the Union Government would regard the provisions of Article 16 of the above Treaty as of full force and effect as between the Union of South Africa and the Soviet Union.</p>

<ol>

<li>(3) No. But Article 16 sufficiently provides against such a contingency.</li>

<li>(4) It is not considered advisable, in the public interest, to disclose any information of this nature.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_external_affairs">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is the Prime Minister not aware of, or has his attention not been drawn to, a plan of campaign published by a <span class="col_125-126" refersTo="page_0131"/>prominent Soviet official in a Soviet newspaper, &#x201C;Pravda,&#x201D; for promoting communist disturbances in the dominions &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_external_affairs" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>No, I think my hon. friend will recognize at once that in these matters it is not advisable to ask supplementary questions in the House, and I think he will recognize that is really a question of importance and should be put on the Table of the House, and not only considered very carefully, but discreetly answered.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Literary Works, Protection of.</heading>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_external_affairs">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. COULTER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of External Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Union withdrew from the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, and, if so, why;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government of the Union after such withdrawal on the 3rd October, 1928, notified its intention to adhere to this convention, and, if so, whether any public notification was given to the Union of the fact; and</li>

<li>(3) whether adherence to the convention involves participation in the expense of maintaining the International Bureau, and, if so, how much and under what vote has been made for it &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_external_affairs" to="#coulter">

<from>The MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2) The position is as follows: The International Copyright Convention, signed at Berne, September 9th, 1886, was revised at Berlin on the 13th November, 1908, and, thereafter, notice of accession to the said Berlin Convention was given on behalf of the Union of South Africa, By Proclamation No. 73 of 30th April, 1920, Union Act 9 of 1916 was extended to certain classes of foreign works. In May, 1928, a conference was held at Rome for the further revision of the convention and notice was given, in terms of Section 25 of the convention, to the Government of the Swiss Confederation, that the Union desired to accede to the revised convention as a full contracting state (not as a part of the British empire).</li>

<li>(3) The Union of South Africa was classed as from 3rd October, 1928, in the 4th Class (10 units) for its contribution to the expenses of the International Copyright Bureau. The contribution will be about &#x00A3;100 per annum, for which provision has been made in the estimates, Vote 14.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Work Colonies.</heading>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. COULTER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any work colony has been established under Act No. 20 of 1927, and, if so, where;</li>

<li>(2) how many men have hitherto been committed to each such colony;</li>

<li>(3) what was the total capital cost of (a) establishing each such colony, and (b) equipping the same; and</li>

<li>(4) what is the annual expenditure in each such colony in (a) salaries and wages, and (b) under other heads, and what is the number of employees employed by the department thereat &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#coulter">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) One at Nuweberg in the magisterial district of Caledon.</li>

<li>(2) The total number of men who have been committed to the colony is 14, of whom 5 are there at present.</li>

<li>(3) (a) The buildings were already in existence have been erected for other purposes, at a cost of &#x00A3;12,664; (b) see reply to (4) below.</li>

<li>(4) in the year 1929. (a) &#x00A3;1,612; (b) allowances to inmates and their families &#x00A3;29, buildings, stores and equipment &#x00A3;2,795, transport and other miscellaneous expenses &#x00A3;290; number of employees 6.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#krige" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. KRIGE:</from>

<p>Might I ask the Minister about one point&#x003F; Is it not a fact that this site is entirely unsuitable &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#krige">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>After a personal visit I think it is thoroughly unsuitable for the present purpose.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Will the Minister kindly inform the House what the total cost of running that institution is&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I think I answered that&#x2014;&#x00A3;1,612.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is it not a fact that under the terms of an order of court the inmates of the colony are not permitted to keep fowls or any other animal on this site because of the danger of polluting a certain water supply &#x003F;</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>African National Bond.</heading>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. COULTER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What subsidy has been paid by the Labour Department to the African National Bond to date;</li>

<li>(2) on what ground was this subsidy paid; and</li>

<li>(3) whether accounts have been rendered by it showing the disposal of this money &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) &#x00A3;8 6s. 8d. per month (i.e., at the rate of &#x00A3;100 per annum) from 1st September, 1928, to 31st December, 1929&#x2014;total, &#x00A3;133 6s. 8d.</li>

<li>(2) The grant-in-aid was made to the Afrikaanse Nationale Bond to enable it to carry on an employment exchange for the benefit of the coloured community of the Witwatersrand, who are not catered for by the departmental or post office employment exchanges in that area. The cost of providing this service departmentally would be considerably more than the amount of the grant-in-aid.</li>

<li><span class="col_127-128" refersTo="page_0132"/>(3) Yes; an account covering the financial year 1928-&#x2019;29 has been received, vide paragraph 7, page 289, of the Controller and Auditor-General&#x2019;s report for that year.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. COULTER:</from>

<p>Might I ask the Minister whether the African National Bond has been Indulging in strong political propaganda on behalf of a certain political party &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I was not aware of it.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>&#x201C;Social and Industrial Review.&#x201D;</heading>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. COULTER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the revenue earned by the &#x201C;Social and Industrial Review&#x201D; in the year ended the 31st March, 1929, from (a) sales and subscriptions and (b) advertisements;</li>

<li>(2) what were (a) the cost of printing and (b) the cost of editing and preparing matter for publication; and</li>

<li>(3) what has been the loss incurred in publishing this journal year by year since its inception &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#coulter">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) &#x00A3;238; (b) &#x00A3;705.</li>

<li>(2) (a) &#x00A3;3,050 (this figure includes the cost of printing special editions); (b) it is not possible to give this information as this work forms part of the ordinary duties of the department&#x2019;s staff, and separate costs are not kept.</li>

<li>(3) The nett cost of the publication was as follows: 1926-1927, &#x00A3;2,443; 1927-1928, &#x00A3;1,578; 1928-1929, &#x00A3;2,123.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>May I ask whether it is the intention of the Government to continue this publication&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Certainly.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Banks and Farmers&#x2019; Bills.</heading>

<question by="#oost" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. OOST</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that the public is complaining about the policy of the banks in refusing to renew bills and about their treatment of farmers who owe them money; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he is prepared to extend the sphere of operations of the Reserve Bank in the interests of agriculture and industry &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#oost">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>(1) and (2) I am not aware that the public is complaining about the policy of the banks in refusing to renew bills and about their treatment of farmers who owe them money, but it is to be expected that at a time of financial stringency like the present complaints of this nature will be voiced. During the year 1929, bank advances and discounts in the Union increased by 5.8 millions, while deposits in the Union contracted by 1.7 millions. In the circumstances the banks have clearly not restricted credit unduly. I have ascertained from the banks that they fully appreciate the position of a number of farmers who have been seriously affected by the fall in prices of farm products, and that the position of many of them will become acute if they are not dealt with sympathetically. I am assured that the banks have no intention of adopting a rigidly restrictive attitude, and that they will do their best to finance their customers so long as their requirements are reasonable and they manage their affairs with discretion and endeavour to meet their liabilities. In other words sympathetic treatment will be accorded to those who merit it. The position of the South African Reserve Bank is that, if the recognized credit institutions of the country deem it prudent to continue or increase existing credit, the bank will meet any reasonable and legitimate demands which may be made upon it in this connection.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. MADELEY:</from>

<p>Does the Minister find that all banks are dealing sympathetically with farmers and other people &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#madeley">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I have been assured by the responsible officials of the large banking institutions that that is their policy.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. MADELEY:</from>

<p>All of them &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#madeley">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Controller and Auditor-General.</heading>

<question by="#borlase" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. BORLASE (for Mr. Pocock)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether he will lay upon the Table a return showing&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) the offices controlled or inspected by the revenue section of the Controller and Auditor-General&#x2019;s office, specified as follows: (i) magistrates&#x2019; offices, (ii) revenue, (iii) native affairs, (iv) mining, (v) miscellaneous;</li>

<li>(b) the dates of the last two audit inspections of each office;</li>

<li>(c) the number of audit staff employed in carrying out these inspections;</li>

<li>(d) the number of surveyors of revenue on the staff of the Commissioner for Inland Revenue;</li>

<li>(e) the offices falling under the survey of such surveyors;</li>

<li>(f) the dates of the last two surveys of each office; and</li>

<li>(g) what co-ordination or co-operation exists between the Controller and Auditor-General, the Commissioner of Inland Revenue, surveyors and public service inspectors &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#borlase">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>In view of the time and labour involved in the preparation of a return as desired by the hon. member, I am not prepared to lay a return on the Table. The information required is, however, available at my office.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_129-130" refersTo="page_0133"/>Public Service Inspectors.</heading>

<question by="#borlase" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. BORLASE (for Mr. Pocock)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many public service inspectors are there;</li>

<li>(2) whether their duties involve the inspection of any offices which are audited and inspected by the Controller and Auditor-General, and, if so, which; and</li>

<li>(3) what were the dates of the last two inspections or visits to such offices &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#borlase">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Seven.</li>

<li>(2) Yes. The inspections undertaken by public service and audit inspectors, respectively, are entirely dissimilar in their scope and object. Those of the former are defined by Section 7 (2) of the Public Service and Pensions Act, 1923, while those undertaken by the latter are laid down in Sections 12-14 of the Exchequer and Audit Act, 1911, as amended by Act No. 31 of 1916.</li>

<li>(3) This will involve the compilation of lists comprising almost every public office in the Union and, in view of position outlined in reply to part (2) of this question, the hon. member may deem such action to be unnecessary.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: White Labour.</heading>

<question by="#borlase" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. BORLASE (for Mr. Pocock)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the number of white labourers in each system or division who have received promotion during the last six months; and</li>

<li>(2) whether white labourers, are now required to contribute to the medical fund, and if so, why &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#borlase">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Cape Western system, 91; Cape Northern system, 63; Cape Midland system, 82; Cape Eastern system, 85; Orange Free State system, 62; Natal system, 89; Western Transvaal system, 89; Eastern Transvaal system, 113; South-West Africa system, 36; Mechanical department, 90; Stores department, 20; Engineering department, 1; Catering department, 7; Total, 828.</li>

<li>(2) Yes, because it was considered that the European labourers, who now represent a large and integral portion of the Administration&#x2019;s staff, should be placed in the same position as other servants and granted the full benefits of the sick fund, for which they pay a small monthly contribution.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. MADELEY:</from>

<p>How much&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Three shillings and sixpence, and two shillings and ninepence.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#lawrence" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. LAWRENCE:</from>

<p>Now that the Minister intends to put the European labourers on the same footing as other artizans with regard to the contributions to the sick fund, does he propose to put them on the same footing with regard to yearly holidays &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#lawrence">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The hon. member is under a misapprehension. We have not placed them in the same position with regard to contributions to the sick fund. Their contributions are very small. With regard to the second question, the reply is in the negative.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#bowie" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. BOWIE:</from>

<p>Do I understand that they now receive full benefit&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#bowie">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Full benefits.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#borlase" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. BORLASE (for Mr. Pocock)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many white labourers were employed on the 30th May 1929, and the 1st January, 1930, respectively;</li>

<li>(2) how many were discharged between those dates; and</li>

<li>(3) how many were taken on &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#borlase">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 12,786 and 12,896, respectively.</li>

<li>(2) 2,209.</li>

<li>(3) 3,401.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<p>These figures exclude labourers employed in a casual capacity.</p>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Tax Reductions.</heading>

<question by="#borlase" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. BORLASE (for Mr. Pocock)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether he will lay upon the Table a return showing the heads of revenue with amounts against each head of the six successive tax reductions totalling approximately &#x00A3;6,000,000, quoted by him in moving the second reading of the Appropriation (Part) Bill on the 14th March, 1929&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#borlase">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will refer to the Hansard report of my speech on 14th March last he will see that I did not say that six successive tax reductions totalled six millions, but my Words were &#x201C;six successive tax reductions have left in the pockets of the people a sum of approximately six millions sterling which would have been payable if our taxation Acts in 1924 had been taken unamended.&#x201D;</p>

<p>The reductions and increases of taxation and surrenders of revenue over the period from 1924-&#x2019;25 to 1929-&#x2019;30 have been as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Revenue surrendered in full year &#x00A3;</p></td>

<td><p>Revenue surrendered over 6 years &#x00A3;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1924-&#x2019;25 Reductions</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Customs Duties</p></td>

<td><p>40,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Tax on roll and pipe tobacco</p></td>

<td><p>20,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Patent medicine duty repealed</p></td>

<td><p>75,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>135,000</p></td>

<td><p>779,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p><span class="col_131-132" refersTo="page_0134"/>1925-&#x2019;26 Reductions:</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Tax on leaf tobacco repealed</p></td>

<td><p>200,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Return to 1d. postage from 1.1.26.</p></td>

<td><p>400,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Return to &#x00A3;d. news-paper postage</p></td>

<td><p>30,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Income Tax: children&#x2019;s abatement increases</p></td>

<td><p>30,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>660,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Increases:</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Customs duties</p></td>

<td><p>400,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Income tax adjustments</p></td>

<td><p>200,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>*600,000</p></td>

<td><p>Nil.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1926-&#x2019;27 Reductions:</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Income tax abatement to married taxpayers increased to &#x00A3;400</p></td>

<td><p>205,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Increased rate of interest on Guardians Fund</p></td>

<td><p>15,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>220,000</p></td>

<td><p>880,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1927 Reductions: Customs duties</p></td>

<td><p>125,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Income tax adjustments</p></td>

<td><p>90,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>215,000</p></td>

<td><p>645,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1928-&#x2019;29 Reductions:</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Customs duties</p></td>

<td><p>503,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Income tax (rebate of 20 per cent.)</p></td>

<td><p>770,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1,273,000</p></td>

<td><p>2,338,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1929-30 Reductions: Customs and excise duties</p></td>

<td><p>200,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Income tax adjustments</p></td>

<td><p>262,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>462,000</p></td>

<td><p>340,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Union reductions (net)</p></td>

<td><p>2,365,000</p></td>

<td><p>4,982,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>PROVINCES.</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Reduction of Provincial taxation consequent upon Act No. 46 of 1925, 1925-&#x2019;26:</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Turnover tax</p></td>

<td><p>215,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Companies tax (Cape)</p></td>

<td><p>30,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Employers tax (Transvaal)</p></td>

<td><p>226,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>471,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Less Personal tax (Natal)</p></td>

<td><p>100,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>371,000</p></td>

<td><p>*1,775,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Union and provincial reductions (net)</p></td>

<td><p>2,736,000</p></td>

<td><p>6,757,000</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The figures given above reflect the estimates made at the time of the changes of imposts of their effect on the revenue for a full year and on the revenue for the financial year in which the change was made.</p>

<p>It does not, of course, follow that the amount of the relief accorded or the burden imposed would be constant over a period of years. In a period of expanding revenue it may be assumed that both would increase.</p>

<p>The figure of six millions which I gave last year as the total relief accorded to the taxpayer over the period is accordingly even more conservative than the above figures indicate.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. COULTER:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the hon. the Minister whether in the speech he has just made he has taken account of the five millions of additional taxation that he has extracted from the pockets of the people.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#coulter">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Taken from their pockets in which way&#x003F; I do not follow the question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#bowen" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. BOWEN:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the hon. the Minister if the 20% deduction of income tax is to be a permanent reduction.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Labour: Inspectors and Determinations.</heading>

<question by="#borlase" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. BORLASE (for Mr. Pocock)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Into how many divisional inspectorates has the Union been divided, giving the number in each province;</li>

<li>(2) how many inspectors or sub-inspectors are attached to each division;</li>

<li>(3) how many determinations are in force under the Wage Act;</li>

<li>(4) how many determinations are under suspension pending decisions of the Supreme or Appellate Divisions of the Supreme Court;</li>

<li>(5) how many Industrial Council agreements are there in force covering (a) national, (b) provincial, (c) urban or municipal areas;</li>

<li>(6) how many businesses under paragraph (3) have to be inspected in each division; and</li>

<li>(7) how many businesses require dual inspection, i.e. under Wage, Industrial, Conciliation or Factory Acts&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#bowen">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) There are eight inspectorates, as follows: Cape Province, 4; Transvaal, 2; Natal, 1; Orange Free State, 1&#x2014;Total, 8.</li>

<li>(2) Cape Town, 11; Port Elizabeth, 4; East London, 1; Kimberley, 1; Witwatersrand, 10; Pretoria, 2; Natal, 5; Bloemfontein, 1&#x2014;Total, 35.</li>

<li>(3) There are 18 determinations in force under the Wage Act.</li>

<li>(4) Of these, four are under suspension pending decisions of the Supreme or Appellate Divisions of the Supreme Court.</li>

<li>(5) There are (a) 3 national, (b) 1 provincial, (c) 14 other industrial agreements in force.</li>

<li><span class="col_133-134" refersTo="page_0135"/>(6) The number of businesses requiring inspection under the Wage Act in each inspectorate is approximately: Pretoria, 1,539; Witwatersrand, 10,672; Natal, 2,500; East London, 470; Port Elizabeth, 1,160; Cape Town, 3,508; Bloemfontein, 800; Kimberley, 88&#x2014;Total 20,737.</li>

<li>(7) Of these, the approximate number subject to inspection under either the Industrial Conciliation Act or the Factory Act is: Pretoria, 84; Witwatersrand, 677; Natal, 250; East London, 67; Port Elizabeth, 29; Cape Town, 224; Bloemfontein, 30; Kimberley, 30&#x2014;Total, 1,391.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. COULTER:</from>

<p>Arising out of paragraph (5), is it not a fact that quite recently in the Transvaal a decision was given whereby every nearby industrial council agreement now in force would be invalid.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>We are taking the steps that are necessary.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#coulter" to="#hon_member">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. COULTER:</from>

<p>How can you say they are not in force &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#hon_member" to="#coulter">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>You don&#x2019;t know where you are.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>I should like to ask the hon. the Minister, are the divisional inspectors and the other inspectors and sub-inspectors sufficiently qualified to be appointed to a higher office in the event of one becoming vacant&#x003F; Are these inspectors less qualified than a man who has not had a day&#x2019;s service in the department; and what are the transcendent qualifications of Mr. Strachan for the lucrative office for which he received preferment&#x003F;</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Political Appointments.</heading>

<question by="#borlase" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. BORLASE (for Mr. Pocock)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour how many ex-members of the House of Assembly or Senate or candidates for the House of Assembly have been appointed to positions either permanent or temporary in the Department of Labour during the last five years, and what are the names and emoluments of each &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#borlase">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>The hon. member is referred to the reply given by the hon. the Minister of the Interior to Question No. 1 on 21st January, 1930.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Labour: Applicants for Work.</heading>

<question by="#borlase" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. BORLASE (for Mr. Pocock)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many applicants for employment were registered each month in 1929 at (a) the Labour Exchange, (b) the Post Office, under the headings adults (male and female) and juveniles (boys and girls); and</li>

<li>(2) what were the average monthly totals for the previous five years&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#borlase">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Owing to the mass of figures and information contained in the reply, I think it would be more convenient if I lay the statement on the Table.</p>

</answer>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td colspan="2"><p>Labour Department: (Adults)</p></td>

<td><p>Post Office:(Adults)</p></td>

<td colspan="2"><p>Juveniles:</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Male.</p></td>

<td><p>Female.</p></td>

<td><p>Male.</p></td>

<td><p>Boys.</p></td>

<td><p>Girls.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(1):</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1929:</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>January</p></td>

<td><p>3,054</p></td>

<td><p>375</p></td>

<td><p>898</p></td>

<td><p>1,975</p></td>

<td><p>1,571</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>February</p></td>

<td><p>2,785</p></td>

<td><p>358</p></td>

<td><p>894</p></td>

<td><p>1,991</p></td>

<td><p>1,548</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>March</p></td>

<td><p>2,637</p></td>

<td><p>320</p></td>

<td><p>786</p></td>

<td><p>1,697</p></td>

<td><p>1,406</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>April</p></td>

<td><p>2,863</p></td>

<td><p>380</p></td>

<td><p>906</p></td>

<td><p>1,474</p></td>

<td><p>1,078</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>May</p></td>

<td><p>2,449</p></td>

<td><p>338</p></td>

<td><p>1,018</p></td>

<td><p>1,291</p></td>

<td><p>952</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>June</p></td>

<td><p>2,179</p></td>

<td><p>344</p></td>

<td><p>831</p></td>

<td><p>1,033</p></td>

<td><p>881</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>July</p></td>

<td><p>2,525</p></td>

<td><p>367</p></td>

<td><p>1,178</p></td>

<td><p>939</p></td>

<td><p>893</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>August</p></td>

<td><p>2,819</p></td>

<td><p>417</p></td>

<td><p>1,111</p></td>

<td><p>872</p></td>

<td><p>888</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>September</p></td>

<td><p>3,016</p></td>

<td><p>361</p></td>

<td><p>955</p></td>

<td><p>896</p></td>

<td><p>823</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>October</p></td>

<td><p>3,182</p></td>

<td><p>321</p></td>

<td><p>894</p></td>

<td><p>820</p></td>

<td><p>729</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>November</p></td>

<td><p>3,060</p></td>

<td><p>312</p></td>

<td><p>854</p></td>

<td><p>791</p></td>

<td><p>669</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>December</p></td>

<td><p>2,493</p></td>

<td><p>226</p></td>

<td><p>841</p></td>

<td><p>1,175</p></td>

<td><p>750</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(2):</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1928</p></td>

<td><p>2,760</p></td>

<td><p>344</p></td>

<td><p>1,180</p></td>

<td><p>1,428</p></td>

<td><p>1,154</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1927</p></td>

<td><p>2,677</p></td>

<td><p>377</p></td>

<td><p>1,122</p></td>

<td><p>1,516</p></td>

<td><p>1,379</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1926</p></td>

<td><p>2,501</p></td>

<td><p>401</p></td>

<td><p>613</p></td>

<td><p>1,332</p></td>

<td><p>1,459</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1925</p></td>

<td><p>2,305</p></td>

<td><p>350</p></td>

<td><p>307*</p></td>

<td><p>1,504</p></td>

<td><p>1,454</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1924</p></td>

<td><p>1,008</p></td>

<td><p>174</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>1,400</p></td>

<td><p>1,443</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>*From June, 1925&#x2014;December, 1925.</p>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service: Mr. D. Steyn.</heading>

<question by="#borlase" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Mr. BORLASE (for Mr. Pocock)</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the date of Mr. D. Steyn&#x2019;s appointment to the permanent staff of the public service;</li>

<li><span class="col_135-136" refersTo="page_0136"/>(2) what was the date of relinquishment of his appointment as private secretary to the Prime Minister; and</li>

<li>(3) what was the date of his appointment as Union representative at Louren&#x00E7;o Marques, and what are his emoluments as such &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#borlase">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 1st September. 1929.</li>

<li>(2) 31st August, 1929.</li>

<li>(3) 1st. September, 1929, at a pensionable salary of &#x00A3;1,250 per annum on the scale &#x00A3;1,250&#x2014;40&#x2014;1,400, plus a foreign allowance at the rate of 20 per cent, of pensionable salary, a representation allowance of &#x00A3;350 per annum, and a special cost of living and climatic allowance of &#x00A3;170 per annum.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Can the Prime Minister tell us what are the duties of this official&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#nathan">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I am not prepared to do so, because I am not prepared to keep this House going for two or three days. The hon. member ought to know what the functions and duties of the official are.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#prime_minister">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Are there any other officials in the Prime Minister&#x2019;s department or in any of the other departments considered to be qualified for this appointment, and who are entitled to be regarded as senior to Mr. Steyn &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#marwick">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>Mr. Steyn was not in the service.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#prime_minister">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Were there any other officials who were competent&#x003F; What are the linguistic qualifications of Mr. Steyn&#x003F; Does he speak Portuguese &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#marwick">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>It is to be hoped that there are a great many other officials who are competent to fill that position.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#coulter" to="#prime_minister">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. COULTER:</from>

<p>Arising out of the reply to sub-section (3), will the hon. the Minister tell the House under what law of the Union the functions of a consul outside the Union are defined &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#coulter">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>Is it necessary to answer that question &#x003F;</p>

</answer>

<question by="#coulter" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. COULTER:</from>

<p>It is very necessary.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#coulter">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>But you will not get an answer from me. As a lawyer my hon. friend ought to know that very well.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Typhus.</heading>

<question by="#van_coller" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. VAN COLLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many cases of typhus fever were reported during the twelve months ended the 31st December, 1928;</li>

<li>(2) how many cases proved fatal during the same period of (a) Europeans and (b) natives;</li>

<li>(3) what steps are being taken for the quarantining of all contacts;</li>

<li>(4) what steps are being taken for the dever-minizing of native contacts in the Transkeian territories; and</li>

<li>(5) what restrictions are there preventing contacts from crossing the Kei River into the Cape Province&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#van_coller">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Cases&#x2014;European, 60; non-European, 1,718.</li>

<li>(2) Deaths&#x2014;European, 2; non-European, 228.</li>

<li>(3) The infection is widely disseminated, and quarantining, except under special circumstances, is inadvisable or useless. The infection is conveyed only by infected lice, so that the one essential precaution is to make and keep the natives free from lice.</li>

<li>(4) Special delousing staff is employed where necessary, working under the general direction and supervision of magistrates and district surgeons and the Union Assistant Health Officer for the Ciskei and Transkei.</li>

<li>(5) The infection exists in many localities on both sides of the Kei River. It is not considered that restrictions on natives crossing that river would serve any useful purpose.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Durban, Theft of Firearms in.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been directed to the reported theft or disappearance on a considerable scale of firearms and ammunition from European residents of the borough of Durban, Natal; if so, whether the matter has been investigated, and with what result;</li>

<li>(2) how many complaints were made to the police by persons resident in the borough of Durban alleging the theft or disappearance of firearms and ammunition during the year ending the 31st of December, 1929;</li>

<li>(3) how many criminal prosecutions took place and how many convictions resulted for the theft or illegal possession of firearms in the borough of Durban for the years ending the 31st December, 1928 and 1929, giving the race of the accused and convicted persons; and</li>

<li>(4) whether there were any cases during the period in question of the discovery of the concealment of firearms and ammunition in respect of which prosecutions were not instituted owing to lack of evidence &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes; complaints have been made to the police from time to time by residents of the borough of Durban, Natal, of the disappearance of firearms and ammunition and action has been taken where necessary.</li>

<li>(2) Thirty-six complaints were made during the year 1929.</li>

<li><span class="col_137-138" refersTo="page_0137"/>(3) Twelve prosecutions and eleven convictions during the year 1928 and fourteen prosecutions and eleven convictions during the year 1929. The convictions were in all cases of native males.</li>

<li>(4) No.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Mohair Upholstering.</heading>

<question by="#vosloo" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Mr. VOSLOO</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he is prepared to inform the House of the result of the experiment made by the Administration as to the possibility of using material manufactured from mohair for upholstering passenger coaches &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#vosloo">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Two coaches have been upholstered with the material referred to. One coach was completed at Uitenhage in November, 1928, at a cost of &#x00A3;172. Similar work in buffalo hide would have cost &#x00A3;150. The experiment was not considered a success, as the material used presented a somewhat shabby appearance even when new. The second coach was upholstered oversea with improved quality mohair material, and cost an extra &#x00A3;85 compared with other coaches upholstered at the same time with buffalo hide. This vehicle has only been in service a little over two months, and reports are awaited as to the suitability or otherwise of the material used. It is the intention to bring the coach to Cape Town at an early date for inspection by the members of the Railway Board, and, if the hon. member wishes to do so, he may examine it at the same time.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Diamonds: Namaqualand Yield.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XXI</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the total estimated value of the diamonds won by the Government from the State diggings in Namaqualand during the year December, 1928, to December, 1929;</li>

<li>(2) what was the total number of diggers employed on the mines during that period;</li>

<li>(3) what is the total number of police employed in that area; and</li>

<li>(4) what is the total number of detectives employed there &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) &#x00A3;913,128.</li>

<li>(2) 330.</li>

<li>(3) 75.</li>

<li>(4) 8.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Am I in order in asking what is the value of unsold diamonds the hon. Minister has on hand &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#gilson">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I cannot give that information across the floor of the House.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Citrus Export Levy.</heading>

<question by="#kayser" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. KAYSER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the amount of the levy collected on citrus exports for the season 1929;</li>

<li>(2) what amount from this sum has been paid over to the Citrus Fruit Exchange; and</li>

<li>(3) in view of Government inspection of the expenditure of these funds, what amount was expended by the exchange for advertising citrus fruits overseas, exclusive of salaries paid to officials, and what amount was expended in South Africa, and for what purpose &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#kayser">

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Motor Buses.</heading>

<question by="#haywood" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. HAYWOOD</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) What is the make of motor bus R.661; (b) when was this bus purchased by the Administration; (c) what is its carrying capacity; (d) what was its price; (e) what number of miles had the bus done up to November, 1929, or to a later date if the information is available; and (f) what is the amount expended on its maintenance to date;</li>

<li>(2) whether he will give the following information regarding motor buses R.84 and R.55 respectively, viz.: (a) of what make are these buses; (b) when were they bought; (c) what is their carrying capacity; (d) what were the prices paid for them; (e) what number of miles had they done up to November, 1929; (f) what amount has been spent on their maintenance to date; (g) whether these buses were repaired in a private garage in Natal, land, if so, what was the amount paid for such repairs; and (h) what is the reason that these buses go out of order so often;</li>

<li>(3) whether there are any other motor buses in the Orange Free State which have done more than 35,000 miles, and, if so, what, respectively, are (a) the make, (b) the price, (c) the distance run, and (d) the costs of repair; and</li>

<li>(4) (a) what qualifications are possessed by Mr. Alwright which justify his appointment as mechanical inspector in the Orange Free State, (b) whether he is bilingual, and (c) what are his salary and allowances &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#kayser">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) White; (b) October, 1927; (c) 6,000 lb.; (d) &#x00A3;1,027; (e) 33,422 to end of November, 1929; (f) &#x00A3;21, and now undergoing a general overhaul.</li>

<li>(2) (a) Thornycraft; (b) R.55, February. 1927, R.84, April; 1927; (c) 5,500 lb. each; (d) <span class="col_139-140" refersTo="page_0138"/>R.55 &#x00A3;1,097; R.84 &#x00A3;1,099; (e) R.55 25,769; R.84 38,107; (f) R.55 &#x00A3;372, R84 &#x00A3;893; (g) in the case of R.84 only, and the amount paid was &#x00A3;380; (h) R.55 has been out of commission once only since its transfer to the Orange Free State in April, 1929; R.34 has been out of commission on four occasions since its transfer to the Orange Free State in October, 1928, such periods of inactivity being due to negligent handling by employees who have since left the service.</li>

<li>(3) Yes; (a) two Thornycraft buses; (b) &#x00A3;890 each; (c) 35,069 miles and 51,126 miles respectively; (d) &#x00A3;22 and &#x00A3;106 respectively.</li>

<li>(4) (a) Two years as a motor shop apprentice; fourteen years as chauffeur to the late general manager, during which period he carried out all repair and general overhaul work on the cars driven by him; engaged at various periods on pioneer road motor services, and spent some months in British and German motor factories improving his knowledge; (b) no; (c) &#x00A3;400 plus &#x00A3;46 local allowance per annum.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Piece-Work Inspectors, Salt River.</heading>

<question by="#lawrence" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. LAWRENCE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many piece-work inspectors are at present being employed in the Salt River workshops;</li>

<li>(2) what rate of pay has the Administration laid down for such inspectors;</li>

<li>(3) how many inspectors were appointed (a) from the Salt River workshops and (b) from elsewhere;</li>

<li>(4) in the case of (3) (b), from where were these inspectors appointed; and</li>

<li>(5) when was the system of appointing piecework inspectors instituted (a) in the Salt River works and (b) elsewhere &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#lawrence">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 9</li>

<li>(2) Minimum, &#x00A3;460; maximum, &#x00A3;500, per annum.</li>

<li>(31 (a) 2. (b) 7.</li>

<li>(4) From Bloemfontein, 2; from Uitenhage, 1.; from Durban, 2; from East London, 1; from Pretoria, 1.</li>

<li>(5) (a) and (b) The system was given a trial as from September, 1928, and was ultimately adopted as from 1st April, 1929.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Nafte, Sentence on.</heading>

<question by="#lawrence" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XXV.</num>

<from>Mr. LAWRENCE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any representations were made to the Minister by any person or persons on behalf of one Nafte, who was convicted at Bethal last, year of culpable homicide, and sentenced to seven years&#x2019; hard labour and ten lashes, with a view to the Minister reducing the sentence of imprisonment upon the said Nafte; if so,</li>

<li>(2) (a) when were such representations made, (b) by whom were they made, and (c) what was the nature of the representations:</li>

<li>(3) (a) in how many cases have representations on behalf of convicted persons been made, directly or indirectly, to the Minister since he has assumed office, and (b) in how many cases has he advised the remission or alteration of sentences imposed (i) by magistrates, and (ii) by judges; and</li>

<li>(4) what were the special circumstances which induced the Minister to alter the conditions under which Nafte is serving his present sentence &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#lawrence">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes; representations were made to the acting Minister of Justice before my assumption of office.</li>

<li>(2) (a) On 15th April, 1929, and on subsequent dates in the same month; (b) representations were made in petitions submitted by residents of the districts of Bethal, Boksburg, Middelburg (Transvaal), Potchefstroom, Roodepoort and Ventersdorp; (c) the Minister was asked to recommend to his Excellency the Governor-General to exercise the prerogative of mercy by remitting the sentence of lashes and further by granting such remission in respect of the sentence of imprisonment with hard labour as the Minister might deem fit to recommend. Since my assumption of office recommendations for a remission of sentence have on two occasions been made to me verbally by Nafte&#x2019;s solicitor.</li>

<li>(3) (a) In 239 cases, (b) (i) In 20 cases, (ii) in 11 cases. In addition 86 petitions have been received from convicted persons. Remission was recommended in six cases of sentences imposed by magistrates and in five cases of sentences imposed by judges.</li>

<li>(4) Nafte was removed to Baviaanspoort because he was best able to do the hard labour provided by that institution, viz., farm labour. All applications for remissions are first dealt with by the law advisers, who report on the case in writing. Thereafter the application is considered by the Minister. So far the law advisers&#x2019; recommendations have all been accepted.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Coal Statistics.</heading>

<question by="#robinson" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. ROBINSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many tons of coal are raised annually in the Union;</li>

<li>(2) of these, how many tons are used (a) for domestic purposes and (b) under boilers and for furnace and similar purposes; and</li>

<li>(3) how many tons are used by steamships, and how many tons are exported &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#robinson">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Approximately 16&#x00BD; million tons.</li>

<li>(2) (a) Approximately 1,800,000 tons in 1928; figures for previous years not available. <span class="col_141-142" refersTo="page_0139"/>(b) Information not available, but it may be stated that in 1928 the total consumption of coal in the Union was 10,105,921 tons, of which the railways used 3,263,973 and the mines 2 113,443 tons, leaving a balance of 4,728,505 tons consumed by other industries and for domestic purposes.</li>

<li>(3) In 1928, 1,656,349 tons of coal were bunkered and 1,649,737 tons were exported.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Hospital Nurses and Afrikaans.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Health:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it was with his approval that in 1929 the Medical Council appointed an English-speaking unilingual examiner for the viva voce examination of Afrikaans-speaking nurses at Bloemfontein who desired to avail themselves of Afrikaans for that purpose; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will take the necessary steps to ensure that in future those nurses who wish to take their examination with Afrikaans as medium may do so&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<p>Arrangements for such examinations and the appointment of examiners are entirely, matters for the Medical Council. I have referred the question to that body, which informs me that for the examination referred to it appointed two medical and one nurse examiners, that both medical examiners were bilingual, that there was difficulty in obtaining a suitable bilingual nurse examiner, but that the lady appointed stated she was sufficiently conversant with Afrikaans, that the papers were set in both official languages and the examination conducted throughout in either as desired by the candidate, and that no complaint regarding the examination has since been received from any candidate or training school.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Labour for Roads.</heading>

<question by="#kentridge" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>XXVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. KENTRIDGE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether there is a scarcity of European labour available for roadmaking in the Union; and, if not,</li>

<li>(2) why is native convict labour employed in roadmaking &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#kentridge">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) There is generally no scarcity of European labour for road-making at prevailing remuneration though in certain cases local needs have to be supplied from other areas.</li>

<li>(2) Convict labour is necessarily employed on such useful services as can be found for it but is not employed on any works over which the Department of Labour has control.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Native Convicts, Hiring of.</heading>

<question by="#kentridge" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XXIX.</num>

<from>Mr. KENTRIDGE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What number of natives are serving sentences of imprisonment with hard labour for (a) periods of more than three and less than six months and (b) periods exceeding six months;</li>

<li>(2) how many native convicts are hired out (a) to farmers, and in which districts; (b, to diamond mines, and which; (c) to gold mines, and which; (d) to coal mines, and which; and (e) for roadmaking, and in which districts and under what administrations;</li>

<li>(3) what is the control exercised on native convicts when employed (a) on farms, (b) in mines, and (c) in road-making; and</li>

<li>(4) what are the quarters and rations provided for native convicts when employed (a) on farms, (b) in mines, and (c) in road-making &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#kentridge">

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Iron and Steel Industry Tenders.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XXX.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any tenders have been received in connection with the iron and steel industry at Pretoria; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) how do the figures compare with the estimates of cost already placed before the House &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I am informed by the South African Iron and Steel Industrial Corporation, Ltd., that tenders for their plant are due on the 12th April next.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Polling Officers and Seals.</heading>

<question by="#naud&#x00E9;" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXXI.</num>

<from>Mr. A. S. NAUD&#x00C9;</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the law allows a polling officer to have as many seals as he wishes in his possession for sealing the ballot-boxes at the close of the poll; and, if not,</li>

<li>(2) whether any steps will be taken to prevent this occurring in future&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#naud&#x00E9;">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The regulations framed under the Electoral Act, 1918, as amended by the Electoral Act Amendment Act, 1926, provided for the issue of only one seal to each polling station.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Durban Market Profits.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXXII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What profits have accrued annually to the borough funds of Durban, (a) from the borough market and (b) from the Indian market, and what amount has been expended annually from capital funds on such markets (a) and (b) from 1916 to 1929, inclusive; and</li>

<li><span class="col_143-144" refersTo="page_0140"/>(2) what proportion of the profits has been used in relief of rates, and how has the balance been disposed of &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I would suggest that the hon. member should have this question raised in the Natal Provincial Council. The information asked for is not in the possession of my department.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Posts: Telephone Charges.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XXXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the annual amount to be paid by a business subscriber in Johannesburg for the use of the telephone;</li>

<li>(2) how many calls is he allowed for such annual payment;</li>

<li>(3) in the case of an excess of calls above this figure, what is such a subscriber charged for each such call;</li>

<li>(4) what is the annual amount to be paid by a household subscriber in Johannesburg for the use of a telephone;</li>

<li>(5) how many calls is he allowed for such annual payment; and</li>

<li>(6) what is such subscriber charged for excess calls&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) &#x00A3;9;</li>

<li>(2) 900;</li>

<li>(3) l&#x00BD;d.;</li>

<li>(4) &#x00A3;7;</li>

<li>(5) 600;</li>

<li>(6) 1&#x00BD;d.</li>

</ol>

<p>I may add that the tariff is very fully set out on page 256 of the Post Office Guide, to which I would refer the hon. member for all details.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Catite: Scrub.</heading>

<question by="#abrahamson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. ABRAHAMSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he will inform the House what serious efforts have been made by the Government to solve or deal with the serious problem of the present huge surplus of scrub cattle in the Union;</li>

<li>(2) what was the total export of Union beef during the year 1924-1925 when the &#x00BD;d. per lb. export bounty was in force;</li>

<li>(3) what was the total export of Union beef, exclusive of any Rhodesian beef shipped from Union ports, in the year following the withdrawal of the bounty;</li>

<li>(4) what inducements, if any, have been held out by the Government to encourage the establishment of local canning and meat-extract factories in the Union;</li>

<li>(5) what encouragement, if any, has been extended to the Watkins-Pitchford Process Company in their efforts to establish export of preserved fresh meat;</li>

<li>(6) what were the total quantity and value of preserved meats in tins or jars imported into the Union during the period January, 1929, to January, 1930;</li>

<li>(7) whether, in view of these figures and the surplus cattle in the country unsuitable for export, the Government will assist in the establishment of canning and preserving meat factories in the Union;</li>

<li>(8) what action, if any, has been taken by the Government to give effect to the recommendations made by Mr. Thornton, late chief of the Animal Husbandry Division, in his report after his tour of investigation to the Argentine;</li>

<li>(9) whether Mr. Thornton recommended a canning and extract factory as a means of assisting to solve the scrub cattle problem, and, if so, whether the Government is seriously considering this recommendation, or has devised or approved of some other means it considers of more value;</li>

<li>(10) what particular and special assistance has been given by the Agricultural Department to those farmers engaged in making experimental shipments of slaughter cattle on hoof to overseas markets; and</li>

<li>(11) whether, if the results of the experiments are encouraging, the Government will assist future shipments by every means at its disposal &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#abrahamson">

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Cattle Inspectors.</heading>

<question by="#abrahamson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXXV.</num>

<from>Mr. ABRAHAMSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the total number in Natal and Zululand in the month of August, 1929, of (a) stock inspectors, (b) dipping inspectors, and (c) sheep inspectors;</li>

<li>(2) what number of these officers act in a dual capacity as inspectors of sheep and cattle and/or dipping;</li>

<li>(3) how many of these were actually in the employ of the Agricultural Department on the 31st October, 1924;</li>

<li>(4) how many of the remainder of those employed in October, 1924, have been discharged since August, 1929;</li>

<li>(5) how many new inspectors from outside Natal or outside the service have been appointed in Natal since August, 1929;</li>

<li>(6) whether the Minister received any representations from the Mooi River Farmers&#x2019; Association anent the summary dismissal of Stock Inspector Button, of Mooi River;</li>

<li>(7) what reply did the Minister give to the protest of the Mooi River farmers in respect of Button&#x2019;s dismissal;</li>

<li>(8) what was Button&#x2019;s salary, and what is the salary paid to the dipping inspector appointed in Button&#x2019;s place;</li>

<li>(9) how many years&#x2019; previous service in the department had this man prior to his appointment;</li>

<li>(10) how many similar cases to that of Button have occurred in the department during the period January, 1929, to January, 1930, in Natal; and</li>

<li><span class="col_145-146" refersTo="page_0141"/>(11) what are the necessary qualifications for men appointed to the posts of stock inspectors, dipping inspectors and sheep inspectors &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#abrahamson">

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Drought Distress Relief Act, 1925.</heading>

<question by="#verster" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. VERSTER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact (a) that the notice of his department inviting applications under the Drought Distress Relief Act, 1925 (Act No. 25 of 1925), expired in the western Transvaal on the 15th January, 1930, and (b) that on account of the extent of those districts the notice did not reach a large section of the sufferers before it expired; and</li>

<li>(2) whether in view of the above he will allow a further extension of the time for sending in applications &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#abrahamson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The hon. member presumably refers to the assistance which is being extended to needy tenant farmers by the issue of cattle on repayment.</li>

<li>(2) Yes.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Asiatics: Ali Brothers.</heading>

<question by="#maccallum" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. MACCALLUM</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Moslem or Mohammedan community or any sections thereof in South Africa requested the Government to permit the Ali brothers to enter the Union as their religious leaders;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government agreed to such entry but upon certain special conditions which the Ali brothers found it impossible to accept; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government would be prepared to reconsider the matter with a view to permitting the Ali brothers to enter the Union on the ordinary and usual conditions applicable to other visitors &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#maccallum">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) Yes. The conditions were agreed to by a section of the Moslem community.</li>

<li>(3) No.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Asiatics: Condonation.</heading>

<question by="#maccallum" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXXVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MACCALLUM</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that doubt has been expressed as to the legal status of Indians to whom condonation certificates have been granted;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government is prepared to remove any such doubt by means of legislation; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government is prepared to take into consideration legislation having the effect of permitting the entry into the Union of the wives and the children of such Indians &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#maccallum">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

<li>(3) No.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Bookstall Attendants.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXXIX.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the rate of salary or wages paid to book-stall attendants employed in the South African Railway depots;</li>

<li>(2) what was the total expenditure in salaries or wages paid to book-stall attendants throughout the Union for the year 1928-&#x2019;29; and</li>

<li>(3) what sum was paid to the manager of the South African Railway Publicity Department for the year ended the 31st March, 1929, in respect of travelling and subsistence expenses &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) From &#x00A3;5 per month to &#x00A3;16 per month (according to the importance of the bookstall) plus local allowance where payable. There are also seven bookstall custodians. These are employed on a salaried basis ranging from &#x00A3;192 to &#x00A3;414 per annum, plus local allowance where payable.</li>

<li>(2) &#x00A3;9,976.</li>

<li>(3) &#x00A3;45 1s.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Does the Minister consider a commencing salary of &#x00A3;5 a month sufficient for a woman bookstall attendant&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>It depends on the circumstances.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. MADELEY:</from>

<p>Can she live on &#x00A3;5 a month &#x003F;</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Publicity Department, Dismissals in.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XL.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether there have been certain dismissals from the South African Railway Publicity Branch, Cape Town, recently, and, if so, for what reasons;</li>

<li>(2) whether any loss has been sustained by the Railway Administration in this matter; and</li>

<li>(3) what further action, if any, is to be taken &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#madeley">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No, but two servants, involved in sales irregularities, while under suspension from duty tendered their resignations, which were, accepted.</li>

<li><span class="col_147-148" refersTo="page_0142"/>(2) No.</li>

<li>(3) None.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Horse Sickness and Dr. G. Kind.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XLI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has any information on the subject of the claim of Dr. G. Kind, a veterinary surgeon in Johannesburg, to have discovered a vaccine against deadly horse sickness;</li>

<li>(2) whether the efficacy or otherwise of this vaccine has been tested by the Veterinary Division of the Department of Agriculture; and</li>

<li>(3) whether it can be verified that out of four horses vaccinated by Dr. Kind and subsequently injected with horse sickness virus, every one of the animals survived without re-action, whilst four unvaccinated horses similarly injected died of acute horse sickness &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I understand that Dr. Kind claims to have discovered such a vaccine and has applied for its registration under the regulations dealing with vaccines, sera and similar substances.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) Under the regulations it will be necessary for Dr. Kind to demonstrate the efficacy claimed for the vaccine, and this is at present being dealt with by the department.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Lithuanian Settlers.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XLII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has information that the Rev. Joseph Janillonis, representing the Lithuanian Foreign Office, is now in the Union investigating the possibilities of establishing Lithuanian settlements;</li>

<li>(2) whether emigration from Lithuania to South Africa has been going on at the rate of 6,000 a year;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Rev. Mr. Janillonis has had interviews with the Minister, and whether the Minister expressed approval of the scheme for the settlement of some of the surplus families of Lithuania in the Union and promised to give the Lithuanian emigrants the usual facilities; and</li>

<li>(4) whether, in view of the Rev. Mr. Janillonis&#x2019; statement that there are greater possibilities in South Africa than in the Argentine, the Minister will state what facilities have been offered by him for the settlement of Lithuanian farmers in the Union &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) No.</li>

<li>(3) At the interview which the gentleman referred to had with me, I explained to him the main features of the land settlement legislation in the Union. No approval was expressed of any scheme; in fact, no concrete proposals of any kind were put forward by the Rev. Mr. J. Janillonis. It was made quite clear to him by me that any application by individuals or groups of individuals for assistance under the Act would have to be dealt with by the Land Board in the ordinary manner, and the usual procedure followed.</li>

<li>(4) This point is really covered by my reply to question (3). The Land Settlement Act does not provide for the grant of special facilities to immigrants from overseas.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Has the Minister&#x2019;s attention been drawn to a press statement by the reverend gentleman to the effect that it is the object of the Lithuanian Government to settle some of its surplus farming population in the Union, and that the Minister of Lands has promised him facilities &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I gave no promise.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is there any possibility of this surplus farming population from Lithuania being settled in the district of Rustenburg &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>No, we are going to send them to Natal.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service: Promotions.</heading>

<question by="#conradie" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XLIII.</num>

<from>Dr. CONRADIE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, in certain departments of the public service, promotion committees exist among the officials, which committees recommend who is to be promoted; if so,</li>

<li>(2) how are these committees appointed; and</li>

<li>(3) whether such committees are recognized by the Minister and the Public Service Commission &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#conradie">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) So far as I am aware, a promotion committee exists only in one department of the public service, i.e., that of posts and telegraphs.</li>

<li>(2) This committee is appointed by the Postmaster-General.</li>

<li>(3) It is recognized by the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs and by the Public Service Commission as a body with functions which are purely advisory to the Postmaster-General. Its recommendations are submitted to the Post-master-General, and when endorsed by him, are laid before the Public Service Commission for its consideration. Whenever matters affecting promotions in a particular branch of the department are under consideration by the committee a member of the recognized association representing that branch is permitted to be present in a watching capacity.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Hominy Chop Exports.</heading>

<question by="#conradie" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num><span class="col_149-150" refersTo="page_0143"/>XLIV.</num>

<from>Dr. CONRADIE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What were the quantities and the value of hominy chop exported during each of the years 1926, 1927, 1928 and 1929;</li>

<li>(2) whether all export of this article has virtually ceased; and, if so,</li>

<li>(3) what is the cause and what can be done to mend matters &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#conradie">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The quantities and value of hominy chop exported during the years 1926 to 1929 were as follows: 1926&#x2014;203,461 bags of 150 lb., &#x00A3;76,496; 1927&#x2014;769,981 bags of 150 lb., &#x00A3;336,676; 1928&#x2014;3,193,269 bags of 150 lb., &#x00A3;1,401,596; 1929&#x2014;1,279,816 bags of 150 lb. (value not available).</li>

<li>(2) The export of hominy chop has by no means ceased, though it has decreased considerably since the last quarter of 1928.</li>

<li>(3) The diminished export of hominy chop is not due to any defect in the product, but to the general financial uncertainty in Europe and to the unusual surplus of mealies in Roumania. It appears, therefore, that no steps can be taken to increase the export of this commodity.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Posts: Air Mail Revenue.</heading>

<question by="#conradie" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XLV.</num>

<from>Dr. CONRADIE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the average monthly amount paid for the air postal service between Cape Town and Johannesburg;</li>

<li>(2) what revenue does the State receive from that source; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the aeroplanes in question belong to the Government, and, if so, what was the capital expenditure&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#conradie">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) A subsidy of &#x00A3;8,000 per annum is paid to the African Airways, Ltd., in connection with their air service between Cape Town-Port Elizabeth, Port Elizabeth&#x2014;Johannesburg and Port Elizabeth&#x2014;Durban as a Government contribution for the encouragement of civil aviation in the Union.</li>

<li>(2) At present at the rate of about &#x00A3;3,000 per annum in respect of air mail charges.</li>

<li>(3) They belong to the company.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Glencoe-Retief Line.</heading>

<question by="#friend" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XLVI.</num>

<from>Mr. FRIEND</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he intends to raise the status of the Glencoe-Vryheid-Piet Retief railway line from a branch line to that of a main line; and, if so, when&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#friend">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The point raised by the hon. member involves consideration of the position in regard to the numerous branch lines in the Union&#x2014;a matter which is at present engaging attention.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Mr. Ballinger.</heading>

<question by="#friend" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XLVII.</num>

<from>Mr. FRIEND</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior whether the stay in the Union of Mr. Ballinger, adviser to the I.C.U., is still terminable at the Minister&#x2019;s pleasure under Section 25 of Act No. 22 of 1913; and, if so, when the Minister proposes to terminate Mr. Ballinger&#x2019;s stay in the Union &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#friend">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>Yes. No action is contemplated at present.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Has the Minister noticed nothing in the conduct of Mr. Ballinger indicating the undesirability of his being allowed to continue inflammatory propaganda amongst the natives &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>All I can say is that the grounds for the cancellation of the temporary permit are not sufficient.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. MADELEY:</from>

<p>Has the Minister noticed a box of matches in the pocket of the hon. member for Illovo (Mr. Marwick)&#x003F;</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Wheat and Flour Prices.</heading>

<question by="#mcmenamin" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XLVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. McMENAMIN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether negotiations are proceeding in which there is collaboration between the Board of Trade, the milling companies and the wheat farmers regarding the price of wheat and flour and, consequently, bread; and</li>

<li>(2) what steps, if any, the Government is taking to ensure that the one most intimately affected by the price of bread, viz., the consumer, is represented at such negotiations &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#madeley">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The Government has not been directly associated with the negotiations, which, I understand, have been proceeding during last week between representatives of the wheat farmers and the millers regarding the price of wheat and flour.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#kentridge" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. KENTRIDGE:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us whether the hon. member, or his representative in the Cabinet, has made representations to the Minister before the extra duties on wheat and flour were imposed &#x003F;</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Commission.</heading>

<question by="#mcmenamin" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XLIX.</num>

<from>Mr. McMENAMIN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Commission has yet submitted <span class="col_151-152" refersTo="page_0144"/>a report; and, if not, whether the report is expected in time for consideration in the present session of Parliament &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#kentridge">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The report has not yet been submitted, but it is expected about the end of February, and will be laid on the Table of the House as soon thereafter as circumstances will permit.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Hendbik Uys and Illicit Diamonds.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>L.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a certain Hendrik Uys was, some months ago, committed for trial at Kimberley upon a charge of illicit diamond buying, or being in unlawful possession of diamonds;</li>

<li>(2) whether two of accused&#x2019;s relatives were jointly charged with him;</li>

<li>(3) whether he confessed to being responsible for the possession of the diamonds;</li>

<li>(4) whether the Attorney-General has declined to prosecute in this case, and, if so, upon what grounds; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table the record in this case and any representations that have been made or correspondence that has taken place with reference thereto&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) The case was reopened some time ago for fresh evidence which has just been obtained. The prosecution is being proceeded with. No nolle prosequi is entered by an attorney-general without a special report from the law advisers and with the special consent of the Minister after considering the case in the light of such report. The law advisers&#x2019; recommendations have been invariably followed.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister make it clear whether at one stage the Attorney-General did decline to prosecute &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The Attorney-General is not entitled to nolle prosequi without referring the decision to myself, so there was no decision by the Attorney-General.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Stellenbosch Election.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>LI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether in the case in which an election petition against the return of the hon. member for Stellenbosch at the general election was being heard the Judge-President of the Cape Provincial Division stated that there had been perjury on one side or the other beyond the possibility of mistake or misunderstanding;</li>

<li>(2) whether at the conclusion of his judgment the learned Judge further stated that it was a case which should go to the Attorney-General, for that officer and the police to come to a conclusion as to which persons had committed perjury and as to whether there was evidence to support the other charges;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Registrar of the Court transmitted to the Attorney-General the views of the learned Judge as expressed in (1) and (2); and, if so,</li>

<li>(4) what action, if any, has been taken by the Attorney-General &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) Yes.</li>

<li>(3) Yes.</li>

<li>(4) The matter was immediately handed over to the C.I.D, who are still investigating the case.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Now that we have the hon. member for Stellenbosch (Mr. W. B. de Villiers) in our midst again, does not the Minister consider he might speed up the investigation since the hon. member&#x2019;s family escutcheon enjoys protection here&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>That question is wholly uncalled for, and is a reflection on the Criminal Investigation Department, which I am sure the hon. member will be ashamed of.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Candovek Estates, Natal.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>LII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Government recently purchased the property known as the Candover Estates, Ngotshe District, Natal;</li>

<li>(2) of what farms does the property consist and what mortgage bonds were at the time of sale registered against such farms, of what amounts, and in whose names in each case;</li>

<li>(3) what is (a) the total extent of the property purchased by the Government, (b) the extent of the land already under irrigation, and (c) the extent of land that can be brought under irrigation by reasonable expenditure;</li>

<li>(4) for what crops is (a) the irrigated or irrigable land and (b) the dry or non-irrigable land to be used;</li>

<li>(5) whether the Candover Estates Limited was formed for the cultivation of cotton;</li>

<li>(6) what was the registered capital of the company when first formed;</li>

<li>(7) what were the successive issues of (a) increased capital and (b) debenture issue,</li>

<li>(8) over what assets were the debenture holders given security for their debentures;</li>

<li>(9) what dividends have been paid by this company since its inception; and</li>

<li>(10) to what extent will the recent sale, of the land recover any portion of the outlay of (a) the shareholders, (b) the debenture holders, and (e) the holders of mortgage bonds over the farms &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#marwick">

<from><span class="col_153-154" refersTo="page_0145"/>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) I am laying on the Table a schedule giving the information asked for.</li>

<li>(3) (a) 78,153 acres, (b) Approximately 300 acres on the farm Uitkyk. (c) About 8,500 acres.</li>

<li>(4) Two experimental stations were established some time ago on the property, one under irrigation and the other on dry lands. The experiments are proceeding and, under irrigation, the results are promising in respect of mealies, lucerne, sugar cane, cotton, and coffee. I believe that the main experiments on the dry lands have been with regard to types of cotton. The dry lands are considered suitable for stock raising, maize, kaffir corn and cotton.</li>

<li>(5) The company was formed to carry on farming operations generally and there is no specific mention of cotton in the Articles of Association.</li>

<li>(6) &#x00A3;10.</li>

<li>(7) (a) Capital increased to &#x00A3;100,000 on 24th August, 1920.; capital increased to &#x00A3;150,000 on 15th October, 1924: capital increased to &#x00A3;417,917 on 15th May, 1925. The issued capital according to the latest returns registered with the Registrar of Companies was &#x00A3;396,551. (b) According to the balance sheets for 1925, 1927 and 1928 the debenture issue was &#x00A3;200,000.</li>

<li>(8) The statement which I am laying on the Table shows the various bonds which are registered in favour of the debenture holders.</li>

<li>(9) This information is not recorded in the office of the Registrar of Companies, and my department has no definite information on the point. I am given to understand, however, that according to a balance sheet dated October, 1928, the accrued loss was then approximately &#x00A3;275,000, so I infer no dividend can have been paid during the last few years.</li>

<li>(10) I am unable to say.</li>

</ol>

<p><i>The following is the schedule</i>&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td rowspan="2"><p><span class="col_155" refersTo="page_0146"/>Farm.</p></td>

<td rowspan="2" colspan="3"><p>Extent.</p></td>

<td colspan="2"><p>Bond.</p></td>

<td rowspan="2"><p>Mortgagee.</p></td>

<td rowspan="2"><p>Amount.</p></td>

<td rowspan="2"><p>Remarks.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>No.</p></td>

<td><p>Date of Registration.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Morg.</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Sq.Rds</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Rem. of Magut No. 194A (now No. 19).</p></td>

<td><p>3,016</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>416</p></td>

<td><p>2000</p></td>

<td><p>27.6.1925</p></td>

<td><p>Trustees of debenture holders</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;200,000&#x2014;&#x00A3;200,000</p></td>

<td rowspan="20"><p>Subject to a lease of trading rights No. 76/- 1926 in favour of Cafidover Trading Stores Ltd., (11.11.26). do.<br/>Preference Waived in favour of mortgage bond No. 1684/1926 (3.6.26).<br/>Preference waived in favour of mortgage bond No. 4271/1927 (14.12.27)<br/>Subject to a lease of trading rights No. 76/ 1926 in favour of Candover Trading Stores, Ltd., (11.11.26).<br/>Subject to a lease of trading rights No. 76/ 1926 in favour of Candover Trading Stofes, Ltd., (11. 11.26).<br/>Reference Waived in favour of mortgage bond No. 4271/1927 (14.12.27).<br/>Reference Waived in favour of mortgage bond No. 4271/1927 (14.12.27)</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Borgund No. 132</p></td>

<td><p>3,567</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>582</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Jammerdal (now Eindeder Aarde) No. 103.</p></td>

<td><p>1,649</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>505</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Zuikerkan No. 109</p></td>

<td><p>1,653</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>354</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wilhelmshome No. 183</p></td>

<td><p>1,575</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>500</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bethal No. 247.</p></td>

<td><p>1,396</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>523</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>&#x201C;A&#x201D; of Goedehoop No. 586</p></td>

<td><p>1,139</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>265</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Boschhoek No. 641</p></td>

<td><p>1,654</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>483</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Doornplaats No. 461</p></td>

<td><p>1,575</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>264</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Goedgeloof No. 197</p></td>

<td><p>1,344</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>587</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>&#x201C;A&#x201D; of Overwin No. 163</p></td>

<td><p>1,057</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>392</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Undivided 5/16th share</p></td>

<td><p>2,363</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>355</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Uitkyk No. 135.</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1684 (ranks concurrently with mortgage bond 2000/1925).</p></td>

<td><p>3.6.1926</p></td>

<td><p>Trustees of debenture holders.</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;5,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Prospect No. 591</p></td>

<td><p>1,681</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>133</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Langverwacht No. 256.</p></td>

<td><p>1,789</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>45</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Acts.Sq.</p></td>

<td><p>Rds.</p></td>

<td><p>Pchs</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Rem. of Bedrog. No. 654</p></td>

<td><p>2,766</p></td>

<td><p>2</p></td>

<td><p>19</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Rem. of Zeekoevlei No. 635.</p></td>

<td><p>1,730</p></td>

<td><p>2</p></td>

<td><p>22</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>&#x201C;A&#x201D; of Bedrog &#x0026; Onrecht No. 326.</p></td>

<td><p>1,704</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>&#x201C;A&#x201D; of Diepkloof</p></td>

<td><p>1,707</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>36</p></td>

<td><p>4271 (ranks as a first charge by Order of Court filed with this mortgage bond).</p></td>

<td><p>14.12.1927</p></td>

<td><p>Barclays Bank.</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;20,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Morg.</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>sq.Rds.</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Van hoop Mo. 629</p></td>

<td><p>3,449</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>463</p></td>

<td rowspan="5"><p>2721(ranks concurrently with mortgage bonds 2722, 2723 &#x0026; 2724, all of 1925).</p></td>

<td rowspan="5"><p>26.8.1925</p></td>

<td rowspan="5"><p>Trustees under deed of trust created by Marie Antoinettf Edmee Rouillard (widow).</p></td>

<td rowspan="5"><p>&#x00A3;9,500&#x2014; 200 costs.</p></td>

<td rowspan="5"><p>Subject to a lease of trading rights No. 76/- 1926 in favour of Cafidover Trading Stores Ltd., (11.11.26).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Middernacht No. 645</p></td>

<td><p>1,454</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>66</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>8 of Goedgeloof No. 640</p></td>

<td><p>1,270</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>324</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Welverdiend No. 101</p></td>

<td><p>1,544</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ongeluk No. 622</p></td>

<td><p>1,618</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>566</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>2722 (ranks concurrently with M.B. 2721,2723 &#x0026; 2724 all of 1925).</p></td>

<td><p>26.8.1925</p></td>

<td><p>A. H. Rennie</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;5,000&#x2014;&#x00A3;200 coats.</p></td>

<td><p>do.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>2723(ranks concurrently with M.B. 2721,2722 &#x0026; 2724 all of 1925).</p></td>

<td><p>26.8.1925</p></td>

<td><p>G. H. Rennie</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;6,000&#x2014;&#x00A3;200 coats.</p></td>

<td><p>do.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p><span class="col_156" refersTo="page_0147"/>Tanhoop No. 629<br/>Middernacht No. 645<br/>B of Goedgeloof No. 640<br/>Welverdiene! No. 101<br/>Ongeluk No. 622 Crops</p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p></p></td>

<td><p>2724 (ranks concurrently with mortgage bond 2721, 2722 &#x0026; 2723 all of 1925).</p></td>

<td><p>26.8.1925</p></td>

<td><p>J. A. Kennedy</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;11,500&#x002B; &#x00A3;200 costs</p></td>

<td><p>Subject to a lease of trading rights No. 76/ 1926 in favour of Candover Trading Stores, Ltd., (11.11.26).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Agreement of extension registered 22.6.1926.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Agreement varying conditions registered 10.9.1926.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p></p></td>

<td><p>1685 (Collateral to M.B. 2000/1926).</p></td>

<td><p>3.6.1926</p></td>

<td><p>Trustees Of Debenture holders</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;205,000 &#x002B; &#x00A3;2,000 costs</p></td>

<td><p>Subject to a lease of trading rights No. 76/ 1926 in favour of Candover Trading Stores, Ltd., (11.11.26).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Crops, stock and all assets of business carried on in Natal</p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p></p></td>

<td><p>Notarial Bond No. 437<br/>(Collateral to M.B. 2000/1925).</p></td>

<td><p>7.7.1925</p></td>

<td><p>do.</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;200,000 &#x002B; &#x00A3;2,000 costs</p></td>

<td><p>Notarial Bond No. 397/ 1926 to rank concurrently with this bond (21.7.26).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Preference waived in favour of notarial bond No. 266/1927 to rank concurrently with this bond (20.12.27).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Crops, stock and all assets of Debtors businesses in Natal, etc.</p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p></p></td>

<td><p>Notarial bond No. 397<br/>(Collateral to M.B. 1684/1926) (ranks concurrently with notarial bond 437/1925).</p></td>

<td><p>21.7.1926</p></td>

<td><p>do.</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;5,000</p></td>

<td><p>Preference waived in favour of notarial No. 256/1927 to rank prior to this bond.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Whole of crops, etc., belonging to Mortgagors in connection with business of Cotten Growers, etc.</p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p></p></td>

<td><p>Notarial bond No. 266<br/>(ranks prior to notarialbonds 397/ 1926 &#x0026; 437/1925&#x2014; (collateral to mortgage bond 4271 of 1927).</p></td>

<td><p>20.12.1927</p></td>

<td><p>Barclays Bank</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;20,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>All Mortgagors Movable Property.</p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p></p></td>

<td><p>Notarial bond No 207.<br/>(collateral to mortgage bond 4271 of 1927).</p></td>

<td><p>20.12.1927</p></td>

<td><p>Barclays Bank</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;20,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from><span class="col_157-158" refersTo="page_0148"/>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister be pleased to give us the names of the mortgage bondholders&#x2019; I want that information, if it is included in the reply to be laid upon the Table &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I have not that information; it is not given; the information I got from Pretoria gives the bonds and so on.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is the names of the bondholders not given &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>It is given in the schedule, I find now.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Might I ask the Minister what he intends to do with the farms in question.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#gilson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>The dry farm are to be given out under the land Settlement Act for settlement, but the other farms will be kept back. The Minister concerned is considering building irrigation works.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>What does this price work out at per acre on the average &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I cannot say off-hand. The total area is &#x00A3;64,500 and the extent 78,000 acres.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Sheep and Wool.</heading>

<question by="#baines" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>LIII.</num>

<from>Mr. BAINES</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Border Farmers&#x2019; League, a body representing the farmers&#x2019; associations of the Cape eastern border area, has made representations to the Minister regarding (a) the provision of a veterinary research officer to investigate animal diseases in the above area, and (b) the appointment of a sheep and wool expert specially for the above area;</li>

<li>(2) whether a portion of the funds derived from the proposed wool levy will be devoted to research into the matter of maintaining the quality of the super-fine wool grown in this particular area; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will take an early opportunity of paying a personal visit to the Cape eastern border district&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#baines">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) This matter will be brought before the board which will be appointed to advise upon the expenditure of levy funds.</li>

<li>(3) While I cannot definitely undertake to do this at present the matter will certainly receive my consideration.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Wool and Blankets.</heading>

<question by="#payn" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>LIV. Mr. PAYN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, in view of the fact that the Union last year imported 942,942 lbs. of coarse wool valued at &#x00A3;50,990 for the manufacture of &#x201C;kaffir&#x201D; blankets, which wool is unobtainable in the Union, he will take steps to encourage the production of this type of wool in native areas;</li>

<li>(2) whether this type of wool is used only in the manufacture of &#x201C;kaffir&#x201D; blankets; and</li>

<li>(3) from which countries is this wool chiefly imported, and whether any duty is payable thereon &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#payn">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The encouragement of production of this type of wool in native areas is a matter for consideration by the Department of Native Affairs which will, no doubt, seek the technical advice of my department if necessary.</li>

<li>(2) Yes, as far as I know it is used chiefly in the manufacture of &#x201C;kaffir&#x201D; blankets, South African wool being too fine and soft.</li>

<li>(3) (a) Wool was imported chiefly from the following countries: United Kingdom, New Zealand, India, Australia, Egypt, Germany, France; (b) no duty is payable.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Sikonela And Mount Gaba.</heading>

<question by="#payn" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>LV.</num>

<from>Mr. PAYN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, in connection with the recent bombing of Mount Gaba, a certain hut was set alight by tear-gas bombs; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, after Sikonela&#x2019;s surrender, the police made no attempt to scale Mount Gaba and ascertain the injury to women and children by tear-gas, but returned to Sibasa immediately &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#payn">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>(1) and (2) The following telegrams have been received from the Commissioner of Police in connection with the matter&#x2014;</p>

<p>24.1.30. &#x2014;20. Sekonela arrested no casualties. Force probably returning to-morrow after installing lawful chief.</p>

<p>25.1.30. &#x2014;20/1. Your A.29 Strickland with fifty European constables and forty native constables reached Gaba 6.30 yesterday morning, 24th instant, and sent messages up to Sekonela ordering him to surrender himself to police. No reply received by 8.30. Maj. Meintjes arrived 8 o&#x2019;clock and saw native women and children driving cattle off, but men remaining behind and moving off in direction of both approaches to kraal and taking to bush there. At 8.30 Strickland commenced advance. Meintjes, in accordance with Minister&#x2019;s instructions and to prevent police being ambushed, dropped lachrymatory hand grenades from low altitude and then ascended and kept observation. Natives then began to disperse and at about 9.30 Sekonela with some followers began to move down from mountain and submitted to arrest. Lachrymatory hand grenades used are identical with those experimented with when Gen. Kemp, Mr. Havenga and Mr. Roos walked through gas. Grenades weigh a few ounces each and are non-explosive. <span class="col_159-160" refersTo="page_0149"/>Thatch of one hut was burned, owing, it is thought to grenade breaking on impact and fuse sticking in thatch. No other damage. Strickland&#x2019;s men are on way back, but he himself is at Gaba to-day in connection with installing new chief. He will be back Pretoria Tuesday and shall then obtain full report from him. Details given this telegram obtained from Meintjes and from telephone conversation with Strickland last night. No casualties of any description and no women and children in vicinity of area where tear-gas was dropped.</p>

<p>27.1.30&#x2014;20/2. Reference my telegram 20/1 of 25th instant. Strickland now back, confirms contents my telegram to you. He states that from information obtained after arrest it is clear than when police advanced Sekonela had at least five to six hundred men with him armed with assegais, bows and arrows and some with shot guns, etc., and that it was Sekonela&#x2019;s intention to ambush police, and that his followers had actually taken up their positions with this object in view when Meintjes dropped tear-gas and caused surrender. Also that all women and children had left kraal with cattle before gas dropped. Messenger sent to Sekonela before advance returned with message from him that Sekonela would not surrender but had decided to fight. Only 25 picked men taken from Pretoria, rest from Pietersburg and Louis Trichardt. No recruits taken Everything quiet at Gaba. New chief installed Saturday. Am satisfied that absolute minimum number of men used, and if tear-gas had not been dropped, position would have been very serious. Reuter telegraphed from Pietersburg Saturday, inter alia (<i>begins</i>) <i>:</i> It is held by men who know the Bavenda intimately that if a small posse of police had been despatched to arrest Sekonela when once he had openly defied the authorities, would have been slaughtered to a man. The display of strength was effective and nipped an incipient rebellion in the bud.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Wage Determinations (Sweets).</heading>

<question by="#bowie" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>LVI.</num>

<from>Mr. BOWIE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether certain manufacturers, generally those in Cape Town, are deliberately not observing the wage determination for the sweet manufacturing industry promulgated under the Wage Act;</li>

<li>(2) whether prominent sweet manufacturers in East London are strictly observing the wage determination in the sweet industry with obvious disadvantage to their business because of the non-compliance by their competitors;</li>

<li>(3) whether these facts have been urged upon the Minister&#x2019;s attention since August, 1929, with a view to his taking action in the matter; and</li>

<li>(4) what action, if any, the Minister has taken to enforce (a) the wage determination referred to or (b) to withdraw it&#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#bowie">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) With some exceptions it is true that sweet manufacturers, generally those in Cape Town, have stated that they are not observing the wage determination for the sweet manufacturing industry on the ground that they are advised that it is invalid.</li>

<li>(2) Manufacturing firms in East London are known to be complying with the determination.</li>

<li>(3) Yes.</li>

<li>(4) A prosecution of a Cape Town firm was pending in October, 1929. This has now been carried out and a conviction obtained. An appeal attacking the validity of the determination has been lodged, and the issue is awaited. A prosecution in Port Elizabeth has also been initiated and judgment is awaited. Successful prosecutions have taken place in Johannesburg.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#bowie" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BOWIE:</from>

<p>Can the Minister say that there will be no more delay&#x003F; Certain manufacturers for the last nine months have been suffering under grave diability.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#bowie">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>The hon. member will understand that when a case is taken on appeal we must await the issue of that appeal. The prosecution under the law is not the only thing involved, as there is also liability to actions brought against them by their servants for deficiency of wages due.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>If the appeal is successful what will be the position of the firms who have already paid the determined wages &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>That is obvious.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Is it the case that although this determination has been operative for nearly nine months there has been no final decision yet as to whether it is legal or not &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>We were successful in the magistrate&#x2019;s court, and the convicted person lodged an appeal to the higher court, and we must await the issue of that appeal.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>In view of the circumstances disclosed does not the Minister consider it advisable to arrange for the suspension of this Act &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Certainly not.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Native Labour Ex Union.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<num>LVII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Native Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a departmental committee has been appointed to consider the desirability or otherwise of allowing the importation of native labour to the Union from sources other than those which are at present available; if so,</li>

<li>(2) what is the personnel of the committee;</li>

<li>(3) by what terms of reference is it to be guided; and</li>

<li>(4) when may the report of this committee be expected &#x003F;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_native_affairs" to="#marwick">

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oral_question">

<heading>ORAL QUESTION.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Optional Clause (Geneva Declaration).</heading>

<question by="#krige" to="#prime_minister">

<from><span class="col_161-162" refersTo="page_0150"/>Mr. KRIGE,</from>

<p>with leave, asked the Prime Minister whether he proposes to send to the Senate for its concurrence the resolution adopted by this House yesterday on the question of the optional clause and, if not, his reasons for such refusal&#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#krige">

<from>*The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>Yes, I am prepared to answer the question at once. As the House knows from the speech of His Excellency the Governor-General at the opening of Parliament, the declaration which was approved of here yesterday, was laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament, i.e., on the Table of the Senate as well as that of this House. I do not, however, intend to ask the Senate to approve of the declaration, as I have done in the case of this House. I have already given the reason for this course very clearly on a former occasion, viz., that in respect of the administrative functions of the Government for which it has to take responsibility. I am not prepared to create the bad precedent of going to the Senate for approval of the Government&#x2019;s action. I hold the view that it would be unconstitutional, and a bad precedent for the future. I have given the reasons for this before, and I will do so again. This House is the only one the Government will consider, whether in the respect of approval or disapproval of the measures it takes in its administrative capacity. If it is at the same time to be taken that the Government must also obtain the approval or disapproval of the Senate, then it is clear that the Government will reach the position that this House, which represents the people and is the only House responsible to the people, will approve the Government&#x2019;s action, while the Senate disapproves of it. What then&#x003F; I think the hon. members will see at once that it would be a very bad practice. It is clear that I would take no notice of the resolution of the Senate. This, of course, does not prevent anyone there, now that the statement has been laid on the Table of the Senate, not a member of the Government, moving that the Senate approve or disapprove of the motion, or the declaration. If anyone tables such a motion there and the Senate passes a resolution, then the Government is not prejudiced. I, however, leave it to the Senate. I think that is the procedure which the Senate must follow simply in order to notify the unanimity and general view of the people of South Africa, but it must take place apart from the Government, because otherwise the resolution may compromise the Government, as well as this House, in a way which will injure its constitutional powers and position. When any such motion is debated in the Senate I shall be there to supply information, just as I did here. I think it will be the best to follow that line of conduct.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#duncan" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. DUNCAN:</from>

<p>I wish to ask the hon. the Prime Minister if we can have an opportunity of discussing this matter&#x003F; The Prime Minister has made a most important pronouncement in saying that he no longer regards the Senate as part of the Parliament of the Union. Perhaps the Prime Minister will tell us What part the Senate plays in the Union if it is no longer entitled to express its views upon questions of administrative action &#x003F;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#duncan">

<from>*The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I do not want to debate the whole matter. If the hon. member is satisfied with the reply, he knows what course is open to him. He can introduce the motion expressing his disapproval. Then we can have a debate on the whole matter. I only wish to say the hon. members have no right to say that I do not admit that the Senate has specific functions under the constitution. The Senate has its constitutional functions, but it is not its functions to demand that the Government shall come to it for its approval or disapproval insofar as administrative acts of the Government, which are left to the discretion of the Government, are concerned. My hon. friends forget that it was not even necessary to come to this House, except that the Government follows the line of coming to this House with all the important treaties to give the House an opportunity of debating such treaties, and if then the House disapproves of the action of the Government, then of course it amounts to a motion of no confidence in the Government. As for the Senate, it may disapprove of it a hundred times and I would still take no notice, because we, in this House, represent the people. If, however, the hon. member wants to introduce a motion disapproving of my attitude, I will give him the opportunity.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#krige" to="#prime_minister">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. KRIGE:</from>

<p>I understand the Prime Minister to say that he has on a previous occasion, declared himself in regard to the Senate, but I would like to know whether there was then not a clear distinction drawn that ordinary trade treaties need not be approved by the Senate but that other international agreements would be so approved&#x003F; Here we have to deal with a different class of treaty; a different class of international agreement which had to be ratified. I would like to know whether there is not a grave distinction constitutionally between the German treaty, and the question contained in the optional clause.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#krige">

<from>*The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>There the hon. member is Wrong again. There is nothing which says that the signature must be verified by Parliament.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#krige" to="#prime_minister">

<from>*Mr. KRIGE:</from>

<p>The declaration says so.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#krige">

<from>*The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>They are my words. The words were used by Mr. Louw on behalf of the Government. The question now is how is a thing to be ratified by us. When the treaty With Germany was debated the Government&#x2019;s attitude was that not only in connection with trade conventions, but with all treaties, except the purely formal conventions, it was necessary to come to this House, to the representative of the people. That is actually <span class="col_163-164" refersTo="page_0151"/>the reason why Mr. Louw spoke about ratification, and we adopt the attitude that we will not only seek the ratification of the King, but also of this House. That is not only the case with this treaty. At my office I frequently receive formal conventions, and I do not lay them before the House. It is, however, our policy to allow other treaties of importance to be debated here.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#krige" to="#prime_minister">

<from>*Mr. KRIGE:</from>

<p>Can you now say that Parliament has ratified the resolution&#x003F; Merely the House of Assembly has done so.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#krige">

<from>*The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>There is nothing which must be laid before Parliament.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#unlawful_trading_schemes_bill">

<heading>UNLAWFUL TRADING SCHEMES BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. Pienaar to introduce the Unlawful Trading Schemes Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time, second reading on 7th February.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#kaffir_corn_and_mealie_lands_cleansing_bill">

<heading>KAFFIR CORN AND MEALIE LANDS CLEANSING BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Dr. Conradie to introduce the Kaffir corn and Mealie Lands Cleansing Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 31st January.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#university_of_pretoria_(private)_bill">

<heading>UNIVERSITY OF PRETORIA (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Dr. H. Reitz to introduce the University of Pretoria (Private) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#riotous_assemblies_(amendment)_bill">

<heading>RIOTOUS ASSEMBLIES (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Justice to introduce the Riotous Assemblies (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

<p>On the motion that the Bill be read a second time on 6th February.</p>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the hon. Minister will set down the date of the second reading later</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Is the hon. member really serious&#x003F; This debate will last a long time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>We will carry a motion for this day six months. I am asking the Minister to agree to make the second reading a week later.</p>

<p>Second reading on 13th February.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#trusts_and_combines">

<heading>TRUSTS AND COMBINES.</heading>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House is of opinion that the time has arrived to legislate for the control of trusts, cartels, rings and similar business combines, and for the protection of the public against censurable business methods.</block>

<p>This motion is practically nothing but a simple request to the Government to seriously consider a certain report which was made about three years ago by the Board of Trade and Industries, and to give effect to it as soon as possible. I refer to report 73 of 1926 entitled: &#x201C;Business Practices and Public Regulation.&#x201D; The reason for introducing this motion now is the fact that the civilized world is only now beginning to properly feel the calamitous economic effect of the world war. We know what has happened in other countries, such as the crises in America, and we now again read in the newspapers of the cause celibre which has taken place in England. We also, in South Africa, are only now feeling the calamitous economic results of the war, and that is why I have proposed this motion. Let me say that the direct cause for introducing the motion was that our farmers, especially recently, have got into very bad circumstances economically. I think, though I may be wrong, that the carrying out of the motion may be very useful and even necessary for them. We are all aware that in the matter of wheat transactions, e.g., things have taken place which have injured many people, and have created a position which may be calamitous to many farmers. We all know of farmers who have grown wheat with the greatest trouble and care, and when the harvest was ready, could hardly get a price for their wheat. A part of the wheat was spoilt by rust, or ruined by the drought, but they could not even get a price for the good wheat, because there is a ring of millers. There is not the least doubt that there is a ring which has brought down the prices to a calamitous level, and has thereby brought trouble on the people. In the latest report about the price of wheat issued by the Board of Trade and Industries&#x2014; and we can believe every word of it because they are clever men who have deeply studied the subject&#x2014;is a statement that the price of wheat is at present 24/6d. a bag. In the Transvaal another 2/4d. has to be added for transport, which makes it about 26/- to 27/-. What price do the Transvaal farmers get today&#x003F; I am not talking about soft wheat, but about good, hard Transvaal wheat. They do not get more than 18/- at the most. I know of a case where a load of good wheat did not bring in more than 12/- a bag. I am sorry to use hard words, but it makes the impression of robbery on me. If a poor man steals he goes to gaol, but the rich man, or, still worse, the rich combination, which are possibly the cause of the ruin of many farmers, and practically remove the ground from under him, and make his future impossible, do not go to gaol, but drives about in a beautiful motor car and enjoys life. An end must come to this; that is why I have introduced the motion. There is still another example of how the producers are hit. I am sorry that the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nichol) is not now in his place because he would be able to confirm how the <span class="col_165-166" refersTo="page_0152"/>sugar planters in Zululand are in the clutches of the millers, and that the millers are practically squeezing them to death, and will then probably throw them aside I have figures here which I do not doubt the correctness of, showing that one sugar firm made a profit of &#x00A3;159,680. To that must be added, for writing down of value, &#x00A3;57,000, thus, in all, a profit of over &#x00A3;200,000 is what one sugar firm has made, and the economic position of the planter &#x2014;the man who is the actual producer&#x2014;is everything but satisfactory. As I have said, they are now exploited, and thrown overboard. Let me now quote a case where the consumer is sucked dry by a ring. Take petrol, of which the trade, as we know, is in the hands of various companies, but whatever kind we buy, whether Atlas or Shell or Pegasus, we pay 2/9d. for it in the Transvaal, while in America it costs about 5d. There is, of course, a duty on petrol, but in proportion it is only a small amount. There is therefore a strong combination also in the sale of petrol, and all must contribute to make the rich companies still richer. I notice from a European Newspaper that a meeting was held in Chicago where the petrol king, Sir Henry Deterding, made a speech. He said that they must organize, not only the sale, but also the production of petrol, i.e., bring it under the control of a trust as well. Hon. members must understand clearly that I am not opposed against trusts, and due organisation of the trade, not at all; I can imagine that the proposal of Sir Henry Deterding may have a very good effect. It may cause economy in the production and sale of petrol, but who gets the benefit&#x003F; Is it only to go to the big combines, or is the public to share&#x003F; I think all will agree that it ought to go to the public, but that in practice will not be the case. Hence my motion was necessary. I do not wish to quote further examples, but to refer hon. members to Report No. 73 of the Board of Trade and Industries, which I have quoted. They will find on page 13, et seg., no less than 35 cases of alleged abuse by combines. It is further added that the Board of. Trade and Industries had received many other complaints besides those mentioned. Are we to leave the public in the hands of the big combines, or are we called upon to ask the Government to introduce legislation as briefly indicated in my motion&#x003F; I want again to repeat that my motion is not intended in a hostile way against trade organization. I could quote the Chairman of the Pretoria Chamber of Commerce to prove that he takes up the same attitude. I also want to point out that the able commercial correspondent of Die Burger has pointed out that the shopkeepers of Johannesburg have themselves formed an organization to defeat dishonest competition. My request amounts to this, that, as soon as possible, legislation should be introduced with this report of the Board of Trade as a guide. I do not mean that the report must be adopted in toto. It is four years since it was published and conditions have changed considerably in the meantime, but what the Board of Trade and Industries still abides by, and also I, myself, at least, is the statement on page 63 of the report as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The policy laid down in the Board of Trade and industries Act and in Section 4 of the Tariff Act is in the opinion of the Board a sound one, viz., not to condemn combinations and commercial organizations or even monopolies per se but to regulate their practices in the public interest by means of preventative regulation in the first instance resulting from investigation. There appears, however, to be a need for the development of this policy in a more definite form. Hitherto the Board, in dealing with complaints, has constantly been unable to advise the Minister in precise terms what should be done in view of the limited powers of the Minister, as well as the Board, and owing to the lack of adequate statutory provisions on the subject of unfair competition, restraint of trade, and combinations in restraint of trade.</block>

<p>I hope that this principle will be the basis of the Bill which we are now looking for from the Minister of Mines and Industries. The Board of Trade even went further and suggested two Bills. One of them practically amounts to giving the Board of Trade and Industries more power to go and examine matters where there is some scent and further to be able to criticize it if something wrong is discovered. In other words, the Board wants more powers, and they think that by publicity the people will be frightened. I think that it does not go far enough, and I prefer another Bill, which they have suggested, which contains the following principles&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">This Act, unless the context otherwise states, directly applies to&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>(1) all practices, activities, methods or devices of unfair competition in business, which are or are likely to be detrimental to or against the interest of the public;</li>

<li>(2) all practices, activites, methods or devices in undue or unreasonable restraint of trade which are, or are likely to be detrimental to or against the interest of the public.</li>

</ol>

<p>and I should like the following provisions to be contained in such a Bill&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Unfair competition in business detrimental to or against the interest of the public is unlawful.</li>

<li>(2) Any practice, activity, method or device in undue or unreasonable restraint of trade or otherwise injuring trade operating by way of &#x201C;combine&#x201D; as defined in this Act is unlawful.</li>

</ol>

<p>Such a Bill will be useless if injurious practices or reprobatory methods are not declared illegal. It ought to give the Minister an opportunity of interfering immediately. I return once more to the wheat illustration. If the Minister at the time when the wheat ring and the millers&#x2019; ring commenced to operate in such a, I might <span class="col_167-168" refersTo="page_0153"/>say, dirty way, had had the power which I now propose to give him, he could have intervened, and, e.g., have prohibited the importation of wheat. Then the harm which has been done, and the terrible consequences to our producers would have been prevented. In the existing circumstances it could only be said that nothing could be done before Parliament met, and that the Government would then undoubtedly do something. Nor has our confidence in the Government been deceived because the Minister of Finance immediately on the first day of the Session, Tabled a motion for the purpose of effecting an improvement. The position ought, however, to be such that the Government has powers, as in the case of an offender, to grip any combination whatsoever by the neck, when he persists in them to the detriment of the country. Therefore I hope that the whole House will support the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not rise to oppose the motion. It is a good principle which was adopted by the old Cape Parliament on a similar motion introduced by the then member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger). In this class of legislation it is not sufficient to be satisfied with an Act, but the question must also be asked whether it is practicable. We know that it is very difficult. The Minister of Mines and Industries knows the circumstances in connection with the case against the butchers in Cape Town. A case was brought against them under legislation similar to that now asked for. The hearing lasted for three to four months trying to prove that the people were guilty under the Act. I believe no less than 100 witnesses were examined, but subsequently it proved such a fiasco that&#x2014;I think on the instructions of the Attorney-General&#x2014; the whole matter was withdrawn. The costs were enormous, and it was practically impossible to reach a point under the law to carry it out in practice. The only good the Government can do is to prevent people, who by means of combine, operate uneconomically&#x2014;I might almost say inhumanly&#x2014;to the detriment of the country. I fear this Bill will not be much use in practice, but I do not oppose the principle.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>The question before us is not a new one by any means but has been brought before the House on several occasions, usually during the budget debate. In 1928 the question was raised during the budget debate by the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) and myself. I received a letter from the Board of Trade some time afterwards in which it was said that these matters of the rings&#x2014;and there is hardly a commodity for which there is not a ring&#x2014;had not missed the attention of the Minister and would be enquired into. This has a distinct bearing on the cost of living. I want to bring to the attention of the House the ring for coal. Previously to the Witwatersrand Coal Owners Association of 1923 having got the collieries into their hands household coal was sold at &#x00A3;1, but after the formation of that ring colliery after colliery was brought in and to-day you cannot purchase coal anywhere in the Transvaal except through the ring. Household coal immediately advanced to 25s. per ton. There had been no increase in the cost of production; in fact there had been a decrease, because through the period of the war, when wages and stores were high, the coal was still sold at 20s., but afterwards when there was a reduction in the costs, the cost of coal to the consumer was put up. The association denied everywhere that there was a coal ring, but said it was simply a selling agency. I have a mass of evidence of the ring&#x2019;s existence. One municipality applied to a colliery for a quotation to supply them with coal for a year. The colliery referred them to the Coal Owners&#x2019; Association. They applied to the Coal Owners&#x2019; Association, and were referred to a selling agency, and that agency could charge what price they liked. In that town certain companies had been operating, but a ring was formed, and one man is paid &#x00A3;40 a month for five years to sit at home and do nothing, but must not engage in the coal business. A particular firm has the entire monopoly. This municipality wrote to another company with a similar result, showing that this coal ring is operating in restraint of legitimate trade. It has eliminated competition from the coal trade. I have a mass of correspondence from a merchant in Johannesburg. He wished to deal in coal, and he wrote to a colliery enclosing a cheque, and ordering a certain amount of coal. They sent back his cheque, and told him that if he required coal he would have to apply to the Coal Owners&#x2019; Association in Johannesburg. He applied to the Coal Owners&#x2019; Association, sending them his cheque, and they sent his cheque back, and told him he could get it from Messrs. So-and-so. Messrs. So-and-so can charge what price they like. There are other commodities in the sale of which competition has been crushed, which also have a distinct bearing on the cost of living, and it is time that the Minister took this matter into consideration. His predecessor told us he was keeping an eye on it, but we want the Minister to take his eye off it and put his foot on it. Various necessaries of life are being cornered, and this has a distinct bearing on the very high cost of living. The time has come when the Government should take such steps as will bring these rings under control.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What is the price of coal now &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>25s. per ton. One or two little collieries have recently started, and they are advertising coal at 18s. per ton. They are not in the ring, and they say so. Don&#x2019;t worry; they will soon be in the ring. If they are not bought out they will be squeezed out. These rings are very powerful. Mr. Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone, in a speech once raised the question &#x201C;what shall we do with the trusts,&#x201D; to which a prominent American writer replied, it is not a question <span class="col_169-170" refersTo="page_0154"/>of what are we going to do with the trusts, but what the trusts are going to do with us&#x003F; They can control everything, and if we are not careful we shall be in the grip of the trusts in this country just as the people are in America.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#badenhorst">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BADENHORST</person>:</from>

<p>I feel obliged to say a few words on this motion. If there ever was a time to ask the Government to intervene it is now. The farmer feels that they are in the clutches of trusts, cartels and combines. When a farmer, who grows apples, wants to squirt his fruit for the coddling moth he has to pay 2/6 a pound for the poisen, when he can get it from Capex for 1/- a pound, but they refuse to supply him and refer him to the local merchant, where he is charged 2/6d. a pound. We feel that this is an undesirable state of affairs, because we are exploited, When we want a spare part for a reaping machine the same thing happens. Take the case of wheat. Bread is just as dear now as it was when wheat was very expensive, and yet the farmer cannot get &#x00A3;1 a bag for good wheat, the townspeople are keen on buying a few bags of wheat from the farmer, but the millers will not grind it for them. They mill it for the farmer, but not for the towns man. The farmer feels that this is an unsound position. The same considerations apply to sugar. Take legal practice; take the attorneys along the coast; the Caledon Board controls all. All the attorneys are combined and I think that the leader of the opposition is the chairman of them. They all stand together and we farmers suffer in consequence. They will swallow us all if legislation is not passed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>What about farmers&#x2019; co-operative societies &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#badenhorst">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BADENHORST</person>:</from>

<p>A co-operative society is not meant to rob other people; they merely want fair prices for the producer and no outrageous profits. But what does Natal know about it&#x003F; I do not know how it is to be done, but the Government must try and help in some way or other. The Board of Trade and Industries can be consulted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I think the words which fell from the hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) ought to have some weight with the House. It is all very well enacting laws, but the difficulty is to catch the criminal. Even the police complain that the public do not bring criminals to them. A case arose in Johanesburg recently where a man stabbed another man in the street. He was arrested, and admitted that he was guilty of assault with intent to commit grievous bodily harm, and the magistrate only fined him &#x00A3;5, which in the eyes of the public of Johannesburg, with whom I am in fairly close touch, seemed to be a miscarriage of justice. I asked the hon. the Minister if he would obtain the reasons of the presiding magistrate for the apparently small punishment meted out to the offender. The question I ask is a very mild one. The Minister told me he could not ask the magistrate what was in his mind in giving the decision he did. I am prevented by the reply of the hon. the Minister from stating that the punishment was unreasonable. The Minister states he could not ask the magistrate the reasons for his judgement. The hon. member for Germiston (Mr. Brown) has led the House to believe that 25/- per ton is the price which the consumer has to pay. Now I am an ordinary consumer of coal and I can get it for 18/- per ton. The impression produced was that the price of 25/- was maintained by reason of the combines. We know that trusts exist and the public are fleeced and that the cost of living has increased, but you have to catch your thief. The motion does not go very far. It is merely a pious one. It says in effect that the time has arrived to legislate, therefore it is defective in that respect. It also contains these words&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">and for the protection of the public against censurable business methods.</block>

<p>Now what is meant by &#x201C;censurable&#x201D;&#x003F; There are things that my hon. friend may consider censurable that are allowed by law. The hon. member, if he set out to prepare a Bill dealing with censurable methods, would have a very difficult task. Perhaps the House will let this measure go for what it is worth.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>There does seem to be something in what the hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) has said, and also in what the hon. member for Von Brandis (Mr. Nathan) has said. Members of this House, especially the young members, have a very touching faith in the efficacy of legislation. They say, in effect, &#x201C;Let us pass a law, and having passed it, the law will achieve the rest.&#x201D; From my experience over a period of 20 years, the mere passing of a law does not attain the end you are aiming at. But we have to do something. It is no use to sit down under this kind of oppression. You cannot allow the public to be bled as they are being bled in every direction. Well then, be logical. Hon. members say it is no use to pass a law, we have to catch the criminal. But we usually find the criminal is much cleverer than we are, and he is not very likely to be caught. If you cannot catch him he goes on with his criminalities. I say to the hon. members for Caledon and Von Brandis, he honourable. If you cannot cope with the difficulty, then do what you can. I shall be interested to hear what the Minister of Mines and Industries has to say; he is possessed of not only ability and cleverness, but also courage and integrity. I am going to appeal to him to do the right thing, and also to members of this House to do the right thing, not by passing a law such as that required by my hon. friend (Mr. Oost), but by state interference on behalf of its own citizens. That is the inevitable fact that emerges. I appeal to the intelligent members of this House. The people are its people and all sections of the community have to be protected in the only possible way. It is for the State to regard itself as an executive committee of the Government&#x2014;a real co-operative society&#x2014;I would like to remind the hon. member <span class="col_171-172" refersTo="page_0155"/>for Newcastle (Mr. Nel) it must be a real co-operative society, comprising all sections of the community having as its executive the Government of the country itself to look after all their interests and to allow no one interest to subvert any other interest. The hon. member for Von Brandis (Mr. Nathan) is quite wrong.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>As usual.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>There are occasions when I have to realize that an hon. member is wrong. We are getting more gentle with one another; we are growing mellow with time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Speak for yourself.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I am speaking for myself.</p>

<p>I would not dream of speaking for the hon. member. I say the hon. member is wrong. I also am a householder. No less than the hon. member for Germiston, I have had experience as to the price of coal. I do not question his! experience, but if this is the experience that he can get all the coal he wants <b>j</b> at 18 s. per ton, then he is very fortunate indeed. I venture to say that the quantity you can get at 18s. a ton is extremely limited. Hon. members may close their eyes to the fact. The fact nevertheless remains that these rings do exist, and they exist expressly to mislead the public in the interests of those who comprise the ring. If any coal-dealer dares to stand out against the coal ring, he is squeezed out of existence. The same thing applies to practically every commodity used in the Union of South Africa. Take foodstuffs. The hon. the Minister of Finance has a motion on the order paper asking the House to agree to an increased duty on imported wheat. I am not going to discuss this question now, but the very fact that he has put down the motion&#x2014; and I maintain he has put it down quite wrongly&#x2014;I shall have more to say about that when the proper time comes. But the fact that he has put that on is in itself an example of what we have to endure. On the one hand&#x2014; and this is typical of all the prime producers in this country&#x2014;you have the prime producer getting not sufficient for his goods and the products of the soil he is producing. On the other hand, you have the consumer, who is paying through the nose for it. I cite this as an example. I do not propose to traverse this motion at all on the question of the wheat duties. But you have in the press to-day statements which cannot be denied with truth that the prime producer of wheat&#x2014;and remember there is always a shortfall of South African wheat&#x2014;the prime producer getting something like twenty or twenty-one shillings for his wheat, and the consumer in Johannesburg having to pay 46s. a bag of 200 pounds for Boer meal. There is a tremendously wide gap between the 21s. paid to the producer of the article in its raw state, and 46s. by the consumer for the same article ground. It is true that there is some loss in the grinding, but that does not warrant that tremendous increase in the price from 21s. to 46s. You could go on multiplying examples like that all through the piece: In furtherance of the argument of the hon. member for Germiston (Mr. Brown) if the coal dealer were to set his face against the coal ring he would be closed down out of existence. Then what about the fish&#x003F; The Government finances expeditions to increase the size and activity of our fishing grounds. I think the hon. Minister who will have to reply to this motion, is also in charge of that particular department. We send out ships to investigate the probabilities and possibilities of our shores, for what&#x003F; In order that we might increase the fishing industry, because it is becoming more realized every day that fish is an excellent article of provender for the country. I recommend fish as a provender to hon. members of this House. What happens in the case of fish&#x003F; Fish, like coal, is a remarkably close monopoly. It is in the hands of one ring in South Africa. One does not want to mention the name of a firm although one could do so, but it is remarkable not only that you have close monopolies controlling, incidentally, articles of food, or other requirements of the country, but you have some section of coterie that controls serves that are connected up with some other close preserve, and when you get to the finish you have some section of coterie that controlls the whole. This fishery in itself is part and parcel of the Imperial Cold Storage of this country, and I suggest to the Minister of Mines and Industries that he gives this matter his close attention. This cannot be denied: Let any fishmonger in South Africa dare to sell fish below the price at which he is told to sell it by the fish ring, and he is squeezed out of existence. They cannot destroy the source of his obtaining fish, but through the Imperial Cold Storage company they can stop his ice.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>And the butchers too.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I shall come to the butchers later. They stop his ice, and as is well know to hon. members, an adequate supply of ice is an absolute necessity in a fish business. So they get it all through. The price is artificial, and the fishmonger dare not sell at a price at which he can get a reasonable profit, because they must keep the price up. We have had instances in South Africa where the controllers of fish supplies, or their representatives, have actually gone out to sea and dumped the overplus of fish in order to enable them to keep up the price. These are the things which the public of South Africa have got to know, and they should have their effects upon the minds of hon. members of this House. My hon. friend over there interjected a question about meat. I should like to ask any prime producer who happens to be producing wheat or cattle in this country, if there are any such hon. members sitting in this House, do they ever get what they consider to be a fair price for their meat&#x003F; They do not. When they come to sum up the ultimate cost of production, of bringing an animal to the stage when it is turned into meat, and they realize the price they are getting for it, they must see that <span class="col_173-174" refersTo="page_0156"/>the game is not really worth the candle. On the other hand, the consumer has to pay through the nose for the meat he has to consume. Why is that&#x003F; It is because you have a meat ring again, and again you have the Imperial Cold Storage. The thing in private hands is a little curse, but in the hands of the Government and used for the interests of the people of the country, it would be a blessing. The Imperial Cold Storage company say to the producer &#x201C;That is the price for you,&#x201D; whatever his produce may be, and to the consumer they say, &#x201C;This is the price for you.&#x201D; That has an effect, ultimately, upon the cost, a fixed effect upon the cost, and they are able to hold up both the prime producer on the one hand, and the consumer on the other.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Why don&#x2019;t they make a profit</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>The Imperial Cold Storage company do make a profit. I should like to leave aside, for a moment, the main argument, and answer my hon. friend. I once had occasion to investigate the affairs of the Camps Bay Tramway company. There was a strike of their employees, and somehow or other&#x2014;I do not know how&#x2014;I got mixed up with it. It was part of my duty to investigate various matters. They were not making a profit, but they were holders of real estate to an enormous extent. Instead of showing a profit on their balance sheet, they were using the overplus in order to acquire for themselves large holdings of land and buildings, and in the ultimate result they would have tremendous profits. In the interim they have tremendous assets. All these concerns, though they may not be showing profits to their shareholders, those who control them are either millionaires or approach very closely to it. But whether they show a profit or not, they manage the business correctly the fact remains, and it requires some explanation, that the prime producer does not get enough for his goods, and the consumer has to pay inordinate prices for that portion that he gets. Where it is dissipated does not concern us for the moment, but the facts of the position remain. In all these big matters, like the food supplies of the people of the Union, the Government should regard itself as being in the position of father of the family, and they should look after the whole of the family and not a portion of it. They should be holding the scales evenly, as between the producer and the consumer, and preventing any dissipation and waste of time between the producer and the consumer, as it is possible to do. It is the business of the State, not so much to pass laws&#x2014; although you require laws&#x2014;but to protect the interests of all. Personally, I should only have one law, and that is to play the game to one another.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>Confiscation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Everything is being confiscated to-day, including the hard earned 3s. 6d. per day of the railway men and the results of the hard work of the farmer. I agree that there is a need for the motion. All I ask, however, is that the hon. members should be logical and if they set out to deal with trusts they should do it conclusively. Some years ago, when there was a slump in the price of wool, the then South African Party Government made advances through the banks to the farmers on the security of their wool. When the wool was sold the advances were repaid. Why should that system not he carried a little further&#x003F; The Government should regard itself as the distributing agent for all the necessaries of life, but I do not want the Government to take away the attorney&#x2019;s practice or the farmer&#x2019;s land. The problem is not one merely of protection from the operations of trusts or of assisting farmers in the event of floods or droughts, but the problem is one of distribution, and of dealing with the people who have a grip on the necessaries of life as they pass from the producer to the consumer. On one occasion there was a debate in the House on the fact that eggs kept in cold storage went bad during the time of the seamen&#x2019;s strike. A commission was appointed and found the deterioration of the eggs due to the condition of the cold stores, and the commission recommended the immediate construction of state cold stores. That recommendation was not made by me or the hon. member for Troyville (Mr. Kentridge) but by people who had no belief in what are described as our socialistic nostrums, but the force of circumstances compelled them to realize that it was time the State took a hand in the distribution of certain food stuffs. Unfortunately the Government, despite my efforts, did not see fit to put that recommendation into force. Hon. members may sneer at socialism as much as they like, but eventually they will be forced to realize that the State must assume control of the necessaries of life. In that way only shall we accomplish our end and abolish coal, fish, meat and millers&#x2019; rings, and every other ring operating against the interests of the people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#robinson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROBINSON</person>:</from>

<p>But for two instances of alleged exploitation having been mentioned I should not take part in the discussion. If there is as little truth in regard to the coal combine as there is in the suggestion that the sugar planters of Zululand are being crushed by the millers, then I think the gentleman who have made these allegations have been indulging in sensationalism. May I draw attention to a probable change of public opinion on the matters discussed this afternoon&#x003F; It has always been a popular cry to condemn out of hand trusts and cartels a3 they exist in other countries, but there is a very extensive public opinion that, after all, the trust and cartel may be most useful and desirable institutions. It is quite probable that under the trust and cartel system there would be a cheaper breakfast table than there is at present. The motion does not merely aim at the restriction of the operations of cartels and trusts if they raise unduly the price of foodstuffs, but the motion condemns all trusts and <span class="col_175-176" refersTo="page_0157"/>cartels. I think the hon. member for Newcastle (Mr. Nel) was justified in saying that if the motion is passed it must include co-operative societies, for they are trusts. The hon. gentleman on my left has very rightly said that if you start this legislation to make it effective you have to go right on to socialism. This experiment of socialism is going on in some parts of the world at present, but this country will be well-advised to wait a little longer to see whether it is going to prove successful, as my hon. friend suggests it is going to be. It is most extraordinary that the only company to which reference has been made this afternoon as one deserving of control is the Imperial Cold Storage company. I read recently in the newspapers that that particular company was not in a strong financial position at the present time. Does it not all point to the circumstances that all these combines and trusts are not necessarily the means of making colossal sums of money&#x003F; The Minister of Finance will agree with me that you have legislative powers to-day under which it is possible to take action if you are satisfied that there is a combine in existence which has for its object either the restraint of trade or unduly to keep up the price of foodstuffs. I do hope the Minister is not going to accept the motion, or if he is going to do so, he must modify it to a very large extent. I for one cannot see my way to support the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I do not wish to say much about this motion, but I think that it will be convenient if I mention a few thoughts. The speeches and pleas of all the honorable members who have taken part in the debate show that they realize that it is a very difficult subject to discuss. The matter has already been dealt with in Report No. 73 of the Board of Trade and Industries, where the whole problem is dealt with fully. As I have already said, it is a very comprehensive and difficult subject. But it is clear to me from the report&#x2014;and I must say that I have not yet had an opportunity to make a full study of it, as I should have liked to do&#x2014;that it will be a very good thing if hon. members will carefully study that report. Perhaps they have already done so. If not, then I should like to recommend them to do so. It will then be clear to them that although in certain cases there is dishonesty, because the Board has investigated cases, and proved that many complaints are well grounded, the evil is not so far reaching on the whole. One thing immediately becomes clear, viz., that we have to deal here with a very difficult matter to rectify by legislation. It is our experience, as well as that of other countries, that it is extremely difficult to rectify these evils by legislation. I do not want to say how matters can be controlled otherwise. In one respect I want to support the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley). We can only organize against these big combines in the same way as they have organized against us. When we come to foodstuffs like wheat, meat, fish and other articles, to mention a few, then it seems to me not to be impossible to organize against the combines concerned when evils exist in connection with the sale of those articles. It is my personal opinion that the more restricted method of dealing with such trusts is to, ourselves, organize against them. In the Cape Province we have the Act of 1907, which gives the right to divisional councils and local bodies to apply that Act in their areas. In the meat trade that Act of 1907 has only been proclaimed in two divisions, viz., the Cape and Malmesbury. It has only been applied in two cases during the whole period of twenty-two years, and in all that time no one has yet been convicted under the Act, nor brought to account, although the provisions of the Act are very strong and provide for a fine and imprisonment for improper practices in trade. It seems to me that that Act is sufficient. I do not know what the hon. member for Pretoria (District) (Mr. Oost) intends. I do not know whether he wants anything more in the Act. We can surely not provide for the shooting of these people it they are guilty of a contravention. That would possibly be the most effective way, But we shall have to be content with a heavy fine and imprisonment. We have the Act in the Cape and it is alleged that meat in this town is much too dear. I also think that it is dear when we remember what the farmer gets for it, but the Act of 1907 has never yet brought anyone to account. There are still further laws which are intended to combat this evil, but they also were equally ineffective. I think, however, that there are other means. If the farmer, on the one hand, is organized, and we are constantly advocating that they should organize properly, if they can be organized just as well as those people, and if the consumers, on the other hand, also organize, which they can do under our cooperative statutes, which give them the fullest opportunities for the purpose with the same advantages as are given to a farmers&#x2019; association, then we shall do a great deal to combat the evil complained of. It therefore appears to me that there are other methods beside that of legislation. We may pass legislation here against the trusts but it seems to me that the effective administration thereof will be very doubtful. We further find that under the Customs and Excise Act of 1925 the Board of Trade and Industries can advise the Government to penalize local industries by making them pay the minimum import duty if they demand too high prices for their produce, create a monopoly, or permit bad labour conditions. This legislation also has never yet been given effect to, although it has often occurred that the Board of Trade and Industries has called the attention of industries to this question. There is still other legislation in the Union, but not one of the Acts has ever been employed in an effective manner. During the recess I should like to give my further attention to this matter to see what steps can be taken to defeat the evils complained of, although I cannot see how we can go further than existing legislation. I should like to say a few words about fishing; I am very strongly opposed to throwing fish back into the sea, <span class="col_177-178" refersTo="page_0158"/>because we spend large amounts in fishery enquiries. It is certainly one of the things that must be tackled. The best way of acting in such cases is the way we have adopted hitherto. We have the matter investigated by the Board of Trade and Industries, and if we find that there is cause for complaint, then we warn the combine concerned that we will publish the matter if things are not remedied. I would like to tell the hon. member for Riversdale (Mr. Badenhorst) that I cannot accept any Bill which will allow him to get poison at a 1/- a lb. when the shopkeeper sells it at 2/6d. I think that the mover has done no harm with his motion. He has, in fact, done much good by bringing the matter before the House and calling attention to Report 75 of the Board of Trade. I know it is a very technical report but it is surely a good thing to call the attention of hon. members to it. I hope, however, that he will now withdraw the motion. It is very wide. One does not know precisely what is intended. I accept the fact that the hon. member only meant the few cases that he mentioned here. We shall not, however, obtain the best results by legislation. I hope, therefore, that he will withdraw the motion so that during the year we can see what other steps can be taken when it becomes necessary to interfere in these matters. Before I sit down I want to repeat that those who buy goods must organize, that would be the best. If the farmers organize and the consumers do not, then they will suffer.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>I have listened attentively to the Minister&#x2019;s explanation and I must say that I am fairly in agreement with him, but I have heard so many arguments from hon. members opposite&#x2014;and especially from the left wing, if I may call it so&#x2014;that I must say a few words. They all agree with the spirit of the motion, but at the same time criticize it severely. I do not exactly know what hon. members opposite want or mean, whether they are in sympathy with the motion, and want to assist the producers and consumers, or not. They are so vague in their criticism that I do not know where they stand. About the motion itself I must say that I represent one of the parts of the country where it is felt that we must assist the producers. That part, viz., the North West, can, with a certain justice, be called the meat market of the Union. It is absolutely impossible for those farmers in my district, owing to their financial position to keep proper control over their own property. They have no money, and require it to prosecute their business. Therefore I think that the mover of this motion, if he has done nothing else, has done much in originating the debate on the illegal trade practices in certain industries. Doubtless we must assist the people who cannot protect themselves, viz., the farmers who produce the articles, and by means of the only method, legislation. The Minister said that it is impossible to introduce a Bill in the matter, but I want to point out that it is possible to legislate to fix a definite profit, so that the seller cannot make more than a certain profit. Think, e.g., of the price of sheep; it is so low at present that we feel sorry for the people who have to give away their stock. What is the cause of it&#x003F; Of course the middle man, and, in the case of the trust, the Imperial Cold Storage and other meat rings. The big profit goes into the pocket of the middle man, and I want strongly to urge the Government to appoint a committee to enquire the best way, in the circumstances, of helping the people who cannot help themselves. Take wheat. The hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) has rightly indicated the great difference in price between the article as produced on the farm, and after it has been properly ground and manufactured into meal. The middle men have a monopoly in this case, and it is absolutely impossible for the less privileged man to protect himself. I know that it is very difficult to apply the existing law. It is very difficult to prosecute and bring to account a man who wants to trade wrongly, but in the report of the Board of Trade&#x2014;which has already done much responsible and efficient work&#x2014;it is also said that the way to protect the producer is to make the existing legislation stronger, so that it becomes impossible to get past it. The Board must, of course, look into the laws, and they have found that they are not severe enough. We cannot permit people who are struggling to produce the articles to be exploited for the benefit of certain trusts. I am therefore glad about the introduction of the motion. We saw recently that the whole meat trade was in the hands of a few people in this country. They were prosecuted, but got off, and to-day the position in the meat trade is worse than it was; in other words, the farmers&#x2019; stock is cheaper than ever before. What is the reason&#x003F; Hon. members opposite who say they want to assist the farmer, critisize constructive proposals that are made.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#buirski">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BUIRSKI</person>:</from>

<p>You know better.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, the hon. member for Woodstock (Mr. Buirski) lives in this town and therefore has no sympathy for the people in the drought stricken districts who are the backbone of the country. He is supported by capitalists, and we know that the capatilists do not sympathise with the poor man in the country districts. I hope the House will support the hon. member&#x2019;s motion and that the Government will consider the possibility of doing something to assist the people, and to see that their produce is not sold for a mere song, especially as the position cannot be altered by them at all. I hope that hon. members opposite will not treat a matter of this nature so frivolously as they have hitherto done, but that they will be serious and will show that they want to assist the farmer. And when there is a motion, which will assist the farmer at all, I expect that they will not beat about the bush for political purposes. The matter is of great importance to the farmer and I hope the Government will give it its serious attention, and will take no notice of the remarks of certain hon. members opposite who have shown <span class="col_179-180" refersTo="page_0159"/>that they have no sympathy with the population of the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I must thank the House, all four sides of it, for the way in which they have received this motion. It shows that the House is prepared to give serious consideration to this serious matter. I have great confidence in the Minister. He is still young in office and full of fire and zeal. The only disappointment has been the hon. member for Durban (Stamford Hill) (Mr. Robinson) who dropped a brick and therefore has doubtless disappeared. He said that such a law should also be applied to cooperative societies. Apparently he has quite forgotten that co-operative societies already come under numbers of Acts. We want to put something on the statute book which is not yet there. The hon. member said something in favour of the sugar millers in Natal. I have information Supplied me by a planter. He gives figures and facts. I do not want to go fully into them, but just point out that he says that the sugar farmers are in Very serious danger Owing to the powers the sugar trust has.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#friend">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FRIEND</person>:</from>

<p>Who is the writer of that letter &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>The letter was sent to me privately, and I do not wish to commit a breach of trust by mentioning the name publicly, but I am prepared to show the letter to the hon. member after the adjournment. I want to thank the leader of the opposition for the attitude he has taken up and would like to say that this motion, and what is intended thereby, is not only asked for by my constituency but by the largest part of the Transvaal population. That is why I am so glad that it is getting the attention of the House, and that the Minister is prepared to go into it very carefully during the recess. The Transvaal population, and I think that of South Africa as a whole, wish such steps to be taken to protect the public against injurious practices of certain business combines. I know that the Minister keeps his word and will take steps immediately the recess starts. He must know that there is legislation of this kind in practically the whole civilized world, just as in other dominions, England, Germany, Canada, America and even Columbia. It is true that the Cape Act did not appear to be adequate in Court, but that does not prevent our passing effective measures to get rid of the evil as soon as possible. I want therefore with the leave of the House to withdraw the motion, having full confidence in the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person></from>

<p>objected.</p>

</speech>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railway_overtime_pay">

<heading>RAILWAY OVERTIME PAY.</heading>

<speech by="#deane">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEANE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That in the opinion of this House the Government should take into consideration the desirability of adopting the principle that any member of the running staff of the South African Railways and Harbours Administration shall be paid at the rate applicable to overtime work in respect of any period worked by him in excess of eight hours on any single day, and that all artizans in the railway workshops shall, irrespective of the date when they were engaged, be paid at a uniform rate, such rate being the rate which is now payable to the artizans who were engaged prior to 1921.</block>

<p>On the motion of Mr. Deane, debate adjourned; to be resumed on 31st January.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1930-01-28T17:30:00">5.30 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

