---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - FRIDAY 9 MAY 1930'
layout: debate
year: 1930
month: MAY
month_slug: May
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 9th MAY, 1930.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1930-05-09T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#industrial_conciliation_(amendment)_bill">

<heading>INDUSTRIAL CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Second Order read: House to resume in Committee on Industrial Conciliation (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<p>House In Committee :</p>

<p>[Progress reported yesterday on Clause 1, to which certain amendments had been moved.]</p>

<p>With leave of committee, first amendment proposed by Mr. Coulter withdrawn.</p>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I feel almost certain that since we last discussed the Bill in Committee of the whole House the Minister has had an <span class="col_3939-3940" refersTo="page_2042"/>opportunity of considering the point I raised and has probably obtained evidence to show that I am correct. Therefore I withdraw the amendment I proposed yesterday and substitute the following&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 24, after &#x201C;registered&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;not being a dispute as to the fixing of any maximum or minimum price for any commodity, goods or service produced, manufactured or supplied in or by any industry or the persons engaged therein.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I hope the Minister will be able to tell me he is thoroughly convinced.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I am glad the Minister will not accept the amendment of the hon. member for Gardens. It is simply introducing into the Bill something quite foreign to it and to the principal Act. Instead of making the administration of the Act more difficult, we ought to make it more easy. It is only adding to it, and suggesting to the industrial councils that they might go on these lines. The whole object of the Bill is the spirit of conciliation. The hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter) knows that for many years relations between employers and employees were always strained, and after the upheaval in the Transvaal we did get something better, and the Act of 1924 was passed for the purpose of trying to settle disputes in a different way. We are now trying to amend certain weaknesses in that Act.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>This amendment should not be voted upon silently, because it does propose to whittle down the powers of the industrial councils in such a way that they might not be effective. I can conceive occasions where the employees represented on a certain industrial council, having made a request for an increase of wages, may receive the reply that the employer is not in a position to do so, because he is not in a position to get sufficient from his commodity to enable him to do so. I can conceive circumstances may arise and an arrangement may have to be made between the parties, by which, as a concession for an increase of wages, the employees would have to undertake to help the employer to maintain a particular price of a commodity, and unless they can come to such an arrangement it would mean the employer would not be able to carry out such an agreement. I can conceive an employer being obliged to utilize the other parties; if a particular employer refuses to carry out such an agreement, trade unionists would refuse to work for him. If the Industrial Council is to be limited by such an agreement, I can see occasions when a reasonable request for an increase of wages has to be turned down. The power, I am sure, will not be exercised unreasonably.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>Surely we are not going to pass this Bill and allow certain trades to enforce certain prices on the general public&#x003F; It is a most unsatisfactory condition if this Bill, which is intended to help employees with regard to reasonable conditions as to their pay, should be used for another purpose. The employers may go to their employees and say: &#x201C;Provided you agree to an increased price, we will give you a portion of the profit we are making in the way of wages.&#x201D; I think it is very unsatisfactory that that should be. I think these two questions should be kept entirely separate. I understand from the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) it is not only a possibility but a desirable thing to do, and it is to be one of the methods by which the employee is to get increased wages.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>The fact that this Bill has been in existence for the last six years, and the hon. member (Mr. Stuttaford) did not know before last evening that the Act gave precisely that power to which he referred, is in itself the clearest possible proof that there is very little likelihood of such a dispute ever occurring. Very little if anything has cropped up that the employers&#x2019; side desire to put right in the way of an amendment. They do not want to make the Act any better from their point of view. The confession that has been made by the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford) demonstrates that most conclusively. What does the hon. member for Gardens (Mr. Coulter) want to do&#x003F; If I caught the amendment correctly it was that in the event of any dispute involving the question of prices, no conciliation board shall be set up to deal with it. Surely a question of that kind ought to be considered under the Act.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mcilwraith">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">McILWRAITH</person>:</from>

<p>I am quite satisfied with the Bill as it is. I do not see the danger which the hon. member for Gardens (Mr. Coulter) sees. I think the Minister has told us that there is no such intention as the hon. member for Gardens fears. The preamble of the original Act to my mind is very clear. With regard to fixing prices, I might remind the House that fixed prices during the war rose to a higher percentage than those which were not fixed. I have no fear of fixed prices because if any manufacturer wanted to sell below the price, do you think he would be restricted&#x003F; The people of the land would not allow it. I do not see the need of the amendment, but if we are going to come to a division I must support it.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by Mr. Madeley and Mr. Coulter put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by the Minister of Labour put and agreed to</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by select committee, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 2,</p>

<p>On amendments proposed by select committee,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from><span class="col_3941-3942" refersTo="page_2043"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<p>After line 3, on page 4, to insert the following new paragraph to follow parapragh (a):</p>

<ol>

<li>(b) by the insertion in sub-section (1) of the following new paragraph (h), the existing paragraph (h) becoming paragraph (i):&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(h) the admission of additional employers&#x2019; organizations or trade unions to membership of the council;</li>

</ol></li>

</ol>

<p>and in line 13, after &#x201C;statement&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;of the terms&#x201D;; and in lines 16 and 17, to omit &#x201C;an industrial&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;the&#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I understand that when a memorandum is sent to the Minister, a memorandum of an agreement, the agreement is binding upon non-contracting parties. Under the proposed amendment there is no provision in respect of inspection by members of the public of the original agreement. As that original agreement, when published, has all the force of an Act of Parliament in regard to, not only members who are parties to it, but members who are not parties to it, some of whom may desire to know the terms of it, it seems to me right that members of the public should have the right to inspect the original. For instance, an industrial council settles an agreement and sends the Minister a copy, and decides to make it binding upon non-contracting parties. What guarantee has the Minister that it is a correct copy&#x003F; I am rather surprised that the Minister should have been content merely to receive the agreement which he himself has to give the force of law under Section 9. I am viewing this amendment as affecting agreements under Section 9. The importance of following precisely the terms of the Act has often been illustrated by actions which have come before the board. Therefore, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 20, after &#x201C;Minister&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;. The original of such agreement shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by members of the public at the head office of the said industrial council</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot see any good that this can do. These agreements are arrived at by the two parties to an industrial council. When the agreement is arrived at, a statement of that agreement is supplied, and the certification that it is the agreement arrived at is attested on that document by the signature of the chairman, vice chairman and secretary. It is one of those little technical matters, and I am not prepared to favour the activities of clever attorneys whose contentions have been frequently turned down on some small technical point.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know why the Minister is so averse to accepting a simple proposition like this. The Minister rather alarms me by his words about clever attorneys and little technicalities. The Minister has had some experience in courts of law as to what these little technicalities may mean. Practically half the awards of the conciliation board have been set aside on the ground that those awards were unjust, and all the Minister can see is clever attorneys discovering little technicalities. If a man discovers that the Minister has committed an injustice, the Minister is made to toe the line by the courts of the country. The Minister of Labour may take as lofty a view as he likes about the way he can trample upon public rights, but as long as there is a court of law in the land, if he does not administer his department within the realms of law, he can be called to account by the courts.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I do resent the sneer at clever attorneys&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot allow this to be discussed. The hon. member may deal with the clause before the committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>On Clause 2, the Minister jeered and sneered at clever attorneys. I suggest that the public owes a debt of gratitude to those clever attorneys for having shown the incompetence which obtains&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Order! I cannot allow this.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, I listened to the remarks of the Minister which you allowed to proceed unchecked. If one member is allowed to make remarks to which other members take exception, they should be allowed to say so whether it is germane to the discussion or not. If you say you will not allow the discussion, then you make it appear that you are not fair to members on this side.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. the Minister in replying to the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter) based his objection on this point alone, that clever attorneys might find a way out. That surely is very germane to the discussion. We said that he had no right to make these sneers, and that, in a large number of cases, clever attorneys have proved that justice has been trampled on. Surely we can deal with that point.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I have now allowed the hon. member to reply on this point very fully, and I think hon. members should be satisfied. If this were a second-reading debate, I might have permitted further discussion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>If the Minister levels a sneer at an honourable profession, surely we are entitled to object, and to ask him to withdraw. I think the hon. gentleman should withdraw his remark.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry to have wounded these very tender susceptibilities. I am unable to see that it was a sneer. I simply spoke of clever attorneys&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. D. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>It was the sneering tone.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I said I was not prepared to favour activities of clever attorneys whose contentions would be very frequently turned down on some small technical <span class="col_3943-3944" refersTo="page_2044"/>point. The activities of these clever attorneys have been shown to be unfounded. If the hon. member desires it, I will apologize to the attorneys for having said that some of them were capable of being clever. I would point out that if you want the original to be forwarded to the Minister of Labour, I do not think there is any objection to deleting the words &#x201C;copy of such statement.&#x201D; I am quite willing that such a statement shall forthwith be transmitted to the Minister. Does the hon. member suppose that the Minister is going to get a statement of this sort, which is published in the Gazette, and having got it, he is going, out of his own head, to publish something quite different&#x003F; I think that is going, too far. I do not think I can admit that the department and the Minister are going to receive something and are then going to publish something else purporting to be the thing they receive.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I think the hon. Minister will agree that I am not likely to be supporting hon. members on this side of the House in any amendments which are likely to weaken this Bill. I do say, however, that I cannot see any grave objection can be taken to the amendment that has been moved. Even a member of a trades union may desire to see what agreement has been come to in regard to any particular matter. Surely he, or any other member of the public, has the right to-day to see such a document. As I see it, it does not impugn the hon. Minister at all, nor does it impute motives. I could quite logically and wholeheartedly move such an amendment, not in order that I do not trust this, that or the other Minister, nor that I suggest that such an amendment will accuse him of the possibility of getting one copy of an agreement and issuing or publishing another. It is not that. At any time, any member of the public may want to know, for his own purposes, or for the purposes of his organization, for general public purposes or for any other purpose, that he has the right to go along, as I have the right to go along, and see the list of shareholders of any company, and get information on a thousand and one different points, such as mortgages, transfers or anything else. We have nothing to hide, nor have we anything to hide in regard to the industrial councils. It should be open to the world to be able to go along and see such a document if they so desire. I think the Minister is rather straining a point in objecting to this method. I have no objection to it myself, and I shall support the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want to say too much on this point, because if I were endeavouring to appeal to the intelligence of some hon. members opposite I should be spending a great deal of time unsuccessfully. I am trying to say this, that the reference by the hon. Minister to the legal profession in courts of law is, I think, characteristic of the attitude of his department. They have consistently, in the administration of this Act, and in the administration of other Acts, oppressed the citizens of this country by giving a so-called sanction to a document which has afterwards proved to be illegal, and in hundreds of cases people in this country have been deprived of money and punished before the courts of law upon illegal documents and illegal agreements published by the Department of labour. Now, the hon. Minister stands up and says that it is not possible for a mistake to occur in the Department of Labour, if he attended to the administration of his department and reviewed all the cases in connection with which the courts of law have commented upon such documents, he would not have the audacity to stand up and make such a statement. However, we must forgive the hon. gentleman. I should like to point out the importance of this matter. Here is an agreement which may be made by an industrial council. In the first place, it must, of course, be made at a properly constituted meeting of the council. The Minister proposes, under this clause, that it will be sufficient proof to him, in the exercise of his far-reaching powers, if he receives a statement which is only a copy of an agreement which he is told has been made. He will not know whether this has been passed at a properly constituted meeting of the council, or whether the authority referred to in this section has been given, or whether it is a true and correct copy of the original agreement. Yet, that agreement may form the foundation of a proclamation by the Minister which makes it binding, not only on the parties to the agreement, but on members of trades unions&#x2019; or employers&#x2019; organizations. It is the charter of the industry. When we pass an Act of Parliament it is engrossed upon vellum and checked with careful accuracy and deposited for public inspection with the registrar at Bloemfontein, and any member of the public may see a copy of it, and may, for the expenditure of a few pence, get a copy of the authorized version of the law. Here the foundation of the proclamation is to lie hidden in the offices of an industrial council. It may be that somebody is prosecuted for an infringement of an agreement which has been made binding by the Minister, and he may wish to know what is in the original agreement. He may wish to know if it has been properly executed, and he may wish to inspect it for a variety of reasons. The first step he would wish to take would be to go to the office and see the original in order to define his rights. Under this Bill he will not be able to see it in the Minister&#x2019;s office. Even if the Minister wants it, he cannot get it by right from the offices of the industrial council. They might not be prepared to show it to him. Supposing a person concerned goes to the office of the industrial council and says: &#x201C;I am prepared to pay the necessary fees, and I want to see the original agreement. I am being prosecuted for an infringement, and I am not satisfied with what I have seen in the Gazette. I desire to know what is exactly contained in it.&#x201D; He cannot get it. It may be that, later on, in the course of legal proceedings, he can subpoena someone to produce it. Consequently, the Minister is not only handicapping himself, in spite of the grandiloquent way in which he <span class="col_3945-3946" refersTo="page_2045"/>dismisses anything I have to say, but he may be doing a great injustice to members of the public. Over and over again these agreements have been set aside by the courts of law, and over and over again it has been found that the whole administration under these agreements has been one long sequence of illegalities. These agreements are of great importance. In fact, they amount to compulsory appropriation of property held by one person to be passed over to another person. If you can condemn A to pay &#x00A3;5 to B, you are, in fact, exercising what is equivalent to an act of appropriation. When we talk of expropriation in this House, we have a thousand voices raised to see that it is properly safeguarded. When you have such a thing made compulsory by the state, and I do not question it, surely it is the duty of Parliament to lay down a clear and definite code which can be understood by the man in the street. The hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) is quite correct. The time may come when he may want to see a document under an industrial agreement, but he may not have an opportunity of knowing when in the future some restrictions may be imposed. It is just as much to the interest of the employee as to the employer to know the exact terms of the original law. But the Minister says no, and he prefers to rule in the way in which he has ruled the Labour party, namely, by sheer unadulterated autocracy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER, OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>Would it meet the case if I took out&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The words &#x201C;a copy of&#x201D;, in line 18, and inserted after &#x201C;Minister&#x201D; &#x201C;can be inspected by any member of the public&#x201D; on payment of the prescribed fee&#x201D;&#x003F;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister constitutionally is unable to see the view of anybody who differs from him. It is a definite principle of right that the people concerned should have access to the original document. A great part of the trouble that has arisen over the interpretation of some of these agreements is not due to wilful perversion of words, but owing to small words being substituted when the copy is made, these substitutions frequently being unintentional. All we ask is that people should have access to the original document. As the Minister has gone so far in meeting the objections from this side, cannot he pocket his pride and accept the amendment of the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter)&#x2014;an amendment which is a mere matter of ordinary justice&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not propose to intervene in the complimentary exchanges which have been passing between the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) and the Minister. The Minister&#x2019;s amendment&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I have not moved it, as it was not acceptable to the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>It seems to me to be a pity that the Minister, standing on his dignity, has not accepted an amendment which would do no harm. I cannot think that any trade unionist is anxious to do anything surreptitiously. The proposal of the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) is more to the interest of the trade unionist that it is in the interest of the employer. The hon. member for Germiston (Mr. Brown) shakes his head, but I know of cases in which men have been very dissatisfied with the working of these awards, and it may be of great importance to them to be able to have access to the original document. The effect of the amendment proposed by the Minister would not meet completely the point raised by the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens), and would be rather loading the scale against the workman, for, whilst an employer would be in a position to instruct some clever attorney to write to Pretoria for the documents, there are thousands of workmen who would not be in that position, and able to spend that money, and, therefore, they would be at a disadvantage. Why should they not be able to go to the office of an industrial council wherever situated and get information&#x003F; I hope the Minister will have the moral courage to accept the amendment of the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>These agreements cannot have any effect until all the employers and trade unions have been informed of them, and the ordinary workers also have to vote on the subject. Why should the public trip up to the office of an industrial council to see documents&#x003F; The members of the industrial council are either busy business men, or workmen who attend the meetings of the council at night. Many industrial councils have no staff apart from a typist. It would serve no useful purpose to say that a copy of an agreement can be seen at the office of the industrial council concerned, because, if anybody wishes to know the contents of an agreement, they can purchase the Government Gazette, which published these agreements in toto. Very often it is published in the press of the country, and every industrial council, as far as I know, have published their agreement in pamphlet form, and distributed it to the various members. What more information do you want&#x003F; It is only going to load up the Bill, and make the administration more difficult. It is not the administration of the Act which is wrong, but we have found there were weaknesses in the Act itself, and these we are now trying to fill up.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rood">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">K. ROOD</person>:</from>

<p>Dealing with this question of access to the agreement, at first I thought I agreed with the hon. members for Gardens and Mowbray, but if I follow them correctly it is difficult to say now what they are aiming at. I am beginning to lose confidence in their sincerity. What more the hon. members want than the Minister suggested I do not know. The Minister is good enough to agree to the original signed statement of agreement to be forwarded to him where it would be accessible to everyone. You have two parties entering into the agreement&#x2014;the employers&#x2019; organization and the industrial union, and each of the two parties would be likely to have a copy, <span class="col_3947-3948" refersTo="page_2046"/>and members of each would have access to that copy. There would be a copy in their office, so that the parties concerned and all those interested would have access to it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member and the Minister do not seem to realize that this amendment has come from the select committee. It says a &#x201C;statement&#x201D; means a summary, resume or abstract of the terms of the agreement, and not the whole of it. I challenge the Minister to deny that if you get half-a-dozen trained men to make abstracts of any agreement you will be able to find the most important differences between them. No statement or summary can take the place of the original document. The hon. member for Vereeniging (Maj. K. Rood) laughs, but some of us have had quite a lot of experience of that. If he is a practitioner he knows perfectly well there is nothing more remarkable than the way in which half-a-dozen men pick out what they consider the salient points of a statement, and when you compare them you find half-a-dozen differences at least, which may affect the legal interpretation. What we ask is perfectly simple; let there be access to the original document.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rood">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">K. ROOD</person>:</from>

<p>I may be wrong in my interpretation, but in reading that section I thought the statement meant the agreement itself, what else can it mean&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>If that is so, why not &#x201C;agreement&#x201D; then&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rood">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">K. ROOD</person>:</from>

<p>Previously a statement of the agreement is mentioned and it is quite unnecessary to alter the wording as it would mean the same.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>If that is so, the hon. member gave the whole case away, because if the statement is the same as the agreement I would ask the Minister, is he prepared to substitute " agreement&#x201D; for &#x201C;statement&#x201D; in that clause&#x003F; No, I thought not. What happens then to the argument of the hon. member for Vereeniging&#x003F; (Maj. K. Rood).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I am not concerned very much with this splitting of hairs on the terms, but I am concerned with the position of trade unions, and I know all through the piece they have been regarded with some suspicion as secret societies and all that sort of thing. The Minister himself, in 1912, at the conference at Bloemfontein, wanted to limit the representation of the trade unions at the meetings of the party, and used that argument. That was in the palmy days when they were affiliated with the Labour party. I want to get over that sort of thing, and I cannot, for the life of me, see why we should object to complete publication and completely opening the door. We have nothing to hide. If there is anything to hide, all the more reason why we, who do not want to hide, should have the door open. If there is nothing in the amendment beyond what the hon. member for Germiston (Mr. Brown) calls overloading the Act, then let us have the amendment, because there is not much overloading. Take some official of the trades union in the Cape, who may not have been directly engaged in an agreement somewhere up in the Transvaal, but the members of the trades union down here want to know all about it. Why should they not get into communication with a member of their union in Johannesburg, say, and ask him to go and see the agreement&#x003F; These unions have secretaries available for such a duty, and why should not any member of the public see any agreement. I am not afraid&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>It is in the Gazette.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I will challenge the hon. member to say in what particular Gazette any agreement appears. That is a very weak and almost dishonest argument. I do not read the Government Gazette once in ten weeks, and members of this House get them free. How often do hon. members read them&#x003F; I do not think that disposes either of our liability or responsibility, to say that it appears in the Government Gazette. The trades unions have nothing to hide.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want to protract this discussion. I have already suggested that to meet any objection the way to do it is that the statement of the agreement shall be forwarded forthwith to the Minister. I suggested that to meet the hon. member for Mowbray (Mr. Close). I thought I was meeting him reasonably. I do not think it is necessary, but I thought I was meeting him, and he got up and poured scorn upon me. I ask him seriously, if the original document is in Union Buildings how can it be in some office somewhere else. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 18, to omit &#x201C;a copy of&#x201D;; and in line 20, after &#x201C;Minister&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;and may be inspected by any member of the public on payment of a fee prescribed by regulation&#x201D;,</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Without the recommendation of the Governor-General I am unable to put that part of the amendment which prescribes a fee.</p>

<p>The words &#x201C;on payment of a fee prescribed by regulation&#x201D; accordingly omitted from the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I would suggest that in order to meet the criticism offered the hon. the Minister should agree to the deletion of the words &#x201C;a statement of,&#x201D; and then it will read to the effect that the agreement, not a statement of it, shall be signed by the chairman. As long as the agreement is signed and deposited it will be satisfactory. The agreement has got to be filed and why not say so. I am trying to help the Minister so that we may get on with the business.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>The difference between the Minister and ourselves is that he says that the <span class="col_3949-3950" refersTo="page_2047"/>statement is the same as the agreement. I argue that it is not so. The first words of the section are &#x201C;whenever an agreement has been arrived at Then it refers to a statement of an agreement. A statement can exclude the preamble and all the annexures, and in addition it may be a summary of the contents of the agreement. The Minister is trying to screen irregularity in the execution of agreements. The origin of this amendment is simply this, that every industrial agreement has been set aside for irregularity in execution.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I do hope the Minister will consent to deal with the matter as an agreement. It is open to misconception. As the Minister is making a concession, why not make it willingly and thoroughly&#x003F; It is only a sign of obstinacy not to do so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In lines 12 and 13, to omit &#x201C;a statement of&#x201D;; and in lines 18 and 19, to omit &#x201C;statement&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;agreement&#x201D;,</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#eaton">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">EATON</person>:</from>

<p>I thought it was understood that the original agreement would be the property of the parties concerned and that the Minister would have a copy of it. If that is the position we are quibbling over words. Between trade unions and employers, we do not quibble about matters of this kind and I think we should abide by the wording the committee has decided upon.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I understand what a fair copy of an agreement is, but I would like to ask the hon. Minister what a &#x201C;statement of agreement&#x201D; is. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To delete the words &#x201C;statement of&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>A &#x201C;statement of agreement&#x201D; is simply a document stating an agreement accurately. I have taken advice on this matter. The only point is that instead of that copy, my amendment will mean that the original document shall be transmitted to my office.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will make that clear in this clause. It seems suspicions for the Minister to insist on a vague term like &#x201C;statement of agreement A statement of agreement may be a curtailed resum&#x00E9;. We do not wish to be hard on the Minister and we realize that he may not have grasped the difference between the two conceptions, but I cannot see what objection the Minister has to doing away with this objectionable form of words.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sturrock">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STURROCK</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to refer to two points. When an industrial council is at work, it does not go to the lawyers of the respective parties and ask them to make up an agreement. An industrial council may sit for weeks and during this time all the decisions arrived at are recorded in the minutes. To a layman like myself it seems obvious that a statement of all the agreed decisions must be drawn up and this must be called a statement of agreement. I appreciate that a statement of agreement may be different from a statement of an agreement. I want to make another point. The hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter) said it was very important that every formality should be strictly complied with. As one who is anxious to see this Conciliation Act functioning properly&#x2014; as one who would like to see far more conciliation in industry than there is to-day&#x2014;I hope that steps will be taken to prevent weeks of work on the part of employers and employees being upset because an &#x201C;i&#x201D; has not been dotted or a &#x201C;t&#x201D; left uncrossed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I appreciate the point of view of the hon. member for Turffontein (Mr. Sturrock) in the remarks he has made. Perhaps he will bear in mind that what he calls &#x201C;formalities&#x201D; are strict conditions laid down by the Parliament of this country, to see that justice is done to both sides. When he talks of minor informalities, I ask him who is to judge of what a minor informality is&#x003F; What may appear to be a minor informality to an employer, may appear to be a very major one indeed to an employee. No one can judge of that except a court of law. The court of law has to consider the interests of both sides. For the information of people like the hon. member for Turffontein (Mr. Sturrock) I wish to state that it is not a question of lawyers or of technicalities, but a question of rights as between man and man in this country. The lawyer is there to interpret what the statute says. He may be right, or he may be wrong, and he may be clever, or he may not be clever, or he may be the man whom the Minister consults or may not consult. But the hon. member for Turffontein must remember that we in Parliament are the persons laying down the conditions, whether formalities or otherwise, which cannot be ignored by anyone, whether he be the Minister, the employer, the employee or any other person. The only person who can say whether the rights have been properly carried out is to be found in a court of law. That is the body which the hon. the Minister has disregarded at very great cost to the country. I should like to ask the Minister how many of these technical points have failed when they came before the courts, and how many have succeeded&#x003F; I should like to ask how many were minor points, and how many were major points&#x003F; I challenge the hon. the Minister on that. In regard to the hon. member for Turffontein, I appreciate that an agreement may be arrived at, but look at the Act. You have to go by the Act, or tear it up. Section (9) of the Act of 1924 says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">When in any matter relating to any undertaking, industry, trade or occupation which has been under the consideration of an industrial council or conciliation board, the parties make application to the Minister for a declaration by him that any agreement arrived at shall be binding upon the parties thereto, or shall be extended to other employers and employees within any area in that undertaking, industry, trade or occupation.</block>

<p><span class="col_3951-3952" refersTo="page_2048"/>What is the agreement referred to&#x003F; Surely it is an agreement in writing, embodying as a final result the points between the persons concerned. They are not points minuted one day or another day, and it is not a minute in regard to what has been agreed upon one day or another day. What the Act contemplates is an agreement, and that agreement should be published in writing. You, cannot have a verbal statement of agreement published in the Gazette. We come back to this, that the hon. member for Turffontein (Mr. Sturrock) with all his desire to get practical results, has only got to persuade the Minister to do a simple practical thing. He must get the Minister to drop all his obstinacy and pride, and accept one simple fact. Let him tell the people, the employer or employed, that they can have the opportunity to get the original document. It should be kept in a public place to which they can have access. There they could see also the statement which the Minister has published. They can then see whether his summary of the agreement is a correct summary or not. A man may also find that the agreement has not been properly arrived at in accordance with the formalities laid down by law, and he may, therefore, wish to contest it. The Minister has stated that he will not substitute the word &#x201C;agreement&#x201D; for &#x201C;statement&#x201D; in this amendment. By so doing, he has admitted that there is something different between the agreement and the statement. Therefore, there must be some document in writing which is different from the statement he proposes to publish. The man who is concerned with the document should be able to see what the document has to say.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I am not a lawyer, but I can read all the same.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>We do not blame you for that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I sympathize with them. The principle agreed upon is a statement of any dispute or any other matter by a registered industrial council. In the principal Act it says a memorandum of the terms of settlement shall be drawn up and signed by all the parties. It says there that it is a memorandum. It does not say it is an agreement. It only says that a memorandum shall be drawn up. I am asking the lawyers about this, but they do not seem able to differentiate between the two. They do not seem able to differentiate between what is in the amending Bill and what is in the principal Act. It seems to me that there is no difference whatever between the two.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>As I read this sub-section, the procedure is that this industrial council, after discussing the matter in dispute, comes to a certain agreement, which is settled between the various parties. After they have come together and agreed to a certain thing, the record of that agreement is the statement drawn up and signed by the chairman. That is the only written agreement which exists, so far as I know. It is a statement of the agreement come to, and agreed to by the council. I cannot see what the difference is between the statement and the agreement. I do not know where that is to be kept. Cannot the Minister arrange that the original statement signed by the different people whose signatures are required shall be open to inspection if required&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I have moved that the original document shall be open to inspection by any member of the public on payment of a fee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>May I remind you, Mr. Chairman, that in discussions of industrial matters the Labour party is peculiarly interested.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>That seems to be a reflection on the Chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>No, it is more of a hint. You may, in examining the claims of members to address the House remember that mere numbers ought not to count. It is not an insinuation, but a request.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>But a statement has been made. All the members on those benches have spoken more than once. Therefore, I insist on the withdrawal of the words.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Very well, I will withdraw that and complete my remarks. I wish to urge hon. members who wish that the public should have an opportunity of obtaining information to refrain from constantly flaunting in our faces the possibility of these things ultimately coming to the law courts. All this talk of testing the matter in courts of law is weakening my support of the amendment. This is a Conciliation Act Amendment Bill. Its essence should be conciliation, and we should not be examining it from the point of view of picking holes in agreements, which probably will be drawn up by laymen. The hon. member for Turffontein (Mr. Sturrock) is perfectly right, that you have two sets of men meeting together and neither side having any legal knowledge, and no appreciation of the legal value of words. These people are not likely to be very particular as to choice of language, although this discussion may frighten them into making a mess of these agreements in future by searching around for legal phraseology. All the same, I wish to urge on the Minister the right of the public to know all about these agreements. I ask the Minister to withdraw his amendment, for it makes it more difficult for trade unionists, now that the Minister insists that you shall go to his office to examine a document. It is easy for employers to send someone to make a copy of agreements, but it is not so easy for the other party.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>They also can get copies.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Do not be in too much of a hurry to defend the Minister because he is a Minister, and the Minister should not be in a hurry to set his teeth like a rat trap because <span class="col_3953-3954" refersTo="page_2049"/>some people think he may have made a mistake. Thousands of people who are not parties to these agreements may want to know their contents, but if the Minister does not accept the amendment of the hon. member for Gardens (Mr. Coulter) it will be better to leave the clause as it stands. I hope officials will help the parties to make agreements which cannot be ridden through with a carriage and pair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I am inclined to say to the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) that he should not assume that this desire for an inspection of documents does always arise from the employers. The employees also want to know what their rights are. A case in point occurred the other day. An employee came to me and consulted me on the point whether he could open in competition with his employer, but the agreement made that illegal, and no one could tell us whether the declaration under which the agreement was entered into was valid or not. We are now dealing with the exercise of this law-making machinery. Parliament has dedicated in effect its law-making powers in regard to industrial conditions to particular industrial councils. When they make their agreements they are transmitted to the Minister, who may declare them to be binding on all engaged in the industries concerned. It is just as much in the interests of the employee as of the employer that there should be no room for doubt. The hon. member for Turffontein (Mr. Sturrock) seems to have fallen from grace, no doubt owing to the had company he has been keeping lately. There is a tendency on the part of Government officials to ask to become superior to courts of law, and I am surprised that the hon. member should wish to put these agreements in such a position that they cannot be challenged in a court of law, because of an informality. But if Parliament decides to delegate its function to any other body we should at least make it clear how that is to be exercised, and make sure if it is exercised it is according to law. The original should be available for inspection to the public. I think this amendment is a direct result of the Labour Department trying to keep it from the scrutiny of the public. I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture suddenly proclaimed some regulation, would you not ask whether that was valid if it took away some of your rights&#x003F; There is nothing behind this except a mere desire to have this available for public inspection. The more the Minister rejects this the more I am convinced he means to prevent access. Only the other day an agreement in the printing industry which had stood the test for many years was declared invalid in Natal. I ask that the public should have the same facilities in regard to this as in regard to an Act of Parliament. Any Act is available to anyone who is sufficiently interested.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>The statement is the agreement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. gentleman has not read the first line of the clause&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">When an agreement has been arrived at by the parties.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>A verbal agreement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>Now we are beginning to see what lies behind it. If I rise to make a statement of an agreement, does that mean I have to bring out every word?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>There is a written agreement, and there is a statement of it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>Would you not allow a very wide margin if I made a statement&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sturrock">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STURROCK</person>:</from>

<p>I was attacked by the hon. member for Mowbray (Mr. Close); but when such distinguished members of the legal profession as the hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) and the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter) seem to differ from one another, there is some excuse when lay members are confused. What hope could the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) and I have of coming together when apparently we have to start off with preambles and formal agreements&#x003F; We should each have to go to our respective lawyers and ask them to arrange it for us. I just wish to emphasize that if these conciliation boards are going to function at all they must be made to function with people who know nothing about law. If, in the event of any agreement being arrived at, it cannot be in language which is not absolutely clear and definite to those making it, then I say scrap this Bill. We should try to frame a Bill which will not be upset by all sorts of legal formalities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eaton">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">EATON</person>:</from>

<p>I am satisfied when the two parties to the agreement arrive at conclusions which will enable them to put a statement to the Minister which goes to the Minister as the original. He has agreed to delete the word &#x201C;copy&#x201D;, I think he can go a step further and make the alteration that a statement of the agreement shall be made to the press, the whole of the public will be able to understand, and we will be over the difficulties of our hon. friends there. I am sure what we are aiming at, and I think all those dealing with this matter, is that in cases where disputes take place there should be reasonable machinery set up in order to arrive at some decision which would save disputes and trouble among the various disputing parties, and for that reason we do not want to go into the niceties of language. Our agreement will not he disputed by the two parties who have arrived at it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>What about the law&#x003F; What about the other parties who are bound by the agreement?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>It is published in the Gazette.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eaton">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">EATON</person>:</from>

<p>If it is published in the Gazette, why not publish it generally&#x003F; I think hon. members are afraid of shadows.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from><span class="col_3955-3956" refersTo="page_2050"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter) assumes that there is going to be a solemn agreement between the parties, and he wants a statement of it. Quite right, but I think that in this case there is no agreement at all, except that the statement solemnly signed by the chairman and vice-chairman is the agreement. There is no other agreement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) has put the matter perfectly clearly. May I ask the committee to come to a conclusion&#x003F; We are chasing shadows.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by the Minister of Labour put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Stuttaford in lines 18 and 19 dropped.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by Mr. Stuttaford in lines 12 and 13 and by Mr. Coulter put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendments, as amended, put and agreed to. Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 3.</p>

<p>On amendments proposed by select committee,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 42, to omit &#x201C;or&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;and&#x201D;; and in the same line, after &#x201C;members&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;of such other registered trade union or registered employers&#x2019; organization&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Apropos of his amendment may I ask why he is restricting either of these bodies to representations elsewhere than on their own organization&#x003F; I am in possession of definite representations from the trade union congress, and the amalgamated engineers&#x2019; union, and the sum of their representations is in the direction not of restriction, but of perfect freedom to draw their representation from anywhere they like. They want to have the right to use their own members, members of organizations akin to them, or persons who are not members at all. It is almost certain they would draw on their own membership, but they want to be free to draw on persons outside, if they so desire. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 34, between the words &#x201C;any&#x201D; and &#x201C;member&#x201D; to insert the word &#x201C;persons and in line 36, between the words &#x201C;as&#x201D; and &#x201C;representative&#x201D; to insert the words &#x201C;duly authorized and in line 41, to insert the word &#x201C;persons&#x201D; between &#x201C;such&#x201D; and &#x201C;officers In line 29, I want to delete the word &#x201C;discharged&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Whether or no the present Minister is sympathetic, some future Minister may not be, and trade unions do not want a question of principle involved in a dispute to be at the whim of the Minister in power. That is the representation made to me, and I am in whole hearted agreement. The deletion of all those words throws the decision where a dispute is involved into the hands of the Minister, but in the event of such an amendment being enforced by the Minister, they want it to apply only to a question of an individual being discharged. I also desire to move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To delete the whole of the proviso in Clause 4 of the original Act, and to leave the word &#x201C;may&#x201D; in the fourth line on page 38.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>Can the hon. member move to delete the whole proviso in the original Act, and then move to alter the proviso?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>If I cannot get the whole proviso out, I want to secure an amended form.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>As far as I can see, the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) does not want any conciliation. There will not be any conciliation left if both sides have to take an extreme view of any case. What we want is each side to take a conciliatory view. When the hon. member wants to delete the word &#x201C;discharged&#x201D; he practically breaks down the arrangement of the old Act to deal with a case of an individual. If the committee decides to adopt the hon. member&#x2019;s view, every individual who gets discharged will go to the industrial council with his grievance. I hope the committee will not accept the amendment of the hon. member for Benoni.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I should just like to say to the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford) that I think this has a much wider scope than the industrial council. This is an amendment to Section 4 of the Act. If we go to Section 4 (1) of the Act we find that we are in the same place as we were on the 11th February, 1924, when the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) spoke at great length on this very same question. It then formed the subject of a very long debate in this House. Perhaps my hon. friend will follow me when I say that under Section 4 we are dealing with a case where there are no industrial councils. There being no industrial council in regard to the industry concerned, any number of employees may apply to the Minister for the appointment of a conciliation board for the determination of any dispute in an area between any employer and his employee, and the Minister may take immediate steps for the appointment of such a board. This matter has been fought out at very great length. We are now faced with this position that it is a case where there is no industrial council. Supposing we had an employer with a large business in Commissioner Street, and he had an employee who receives a month&#x2019;s notice, and that employee conceives that he has been wrongly dismissed. He can go to the Minister and the Minister may appoint a conciliation board. There have been such boards held at East London and on the Rand. Under the existing law the appointment of a conciliation board was only possible where a question of principle was involved. The hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) now wants to sweep <span class="col_3957-3958" refersTo="page_2051"/>away all that, and if he is not successful in getting the proviso deleted, he wants a conciliation board in regard to the discharge of an employee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister proposes, in his amending Bill, to amend the original Act by the deletion, from the proviso to sub-section (1) of the following words &#x201C;the engagement, suspension, discharge, transfer or de-rating of an individual employee.&#x201D; I want to amend that amendment by deleting the word &#x201C;discharge.&#x201D; That will mean, if the Minister is successful in deleting all the other words, that I retain the word &#x201C;discharge&#x201D; in the original Act.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>It would then read &#x201C;provided no conciliation board shall be appointed under this section, in a dispute in regard to the discharge of an individual.&#x201D; The hon. member does not quite realize that by leaving out the word &#x201C;discharge&#x201D; you get a meaningless sentence. Does the hon. member intend, in a case where a discharge takes place, that he will restore sufficient words to make it clear that that discharge cannot be dealt with by a conciliation board, unless a point of principle is involved?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>If I am defeated, in moving for the deletion of the whole of the proviso, I want the word &#x201C;discharge&#x201D; to remain in. It will then read &#x201C;provided that no conciliation board shall be appointed under this section, if the dispute is in regard to the discharge of an individual unless, in the opinion of the Minister, a matter of principle is involved.&#x201D; The Minister&#x2019;s opinion of whether a matter of principle is involved will only be allowed to operate in case of a discharge.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I suggest to the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) that his real point is in regard to the question of the proviso. In effect, it is whether it is a matter of principle in relation to the discharge of an individual. I am expressing my own personal point of view, which is precisely the same as it was in 1924. I disagreed,&#x2019; in 1924, with the vast majority of the members of this House, and I am expressing my own personal view when I say that the criterion adopted in this Bill is quite a wrong one. Quite clearly, whether a conciliation board should be appointed or not, is not whether, in the opinion of the Minister, a question of principle is involved, or whether in point of fact a question of principle is involved, but whether, if a dispute arises, it is so resented by a large number of men, that you want to bring the parties together. That is my own personal opinion. We are dealing with conciliation. It will be remembered that employers&#x2019; organizations and trade union representatives met in Pretoria, and this question then arose. Labour was more strongly represented than it is in this House&#x2014;that is to say, it was about half and half. The employers&#x2019; representatives there took the view which I have expressed, which I am sure is the right view. After all, you are dealing with a principle, for it is a question of how the men look at it. It is impossible to get past the point that we had before us in 1924. I then tried to bring the parties together. It was proposed by one of them, on that occasion, to delete these words. I pointed out that it was a case in which a question of principle was being involved, but when an individual is concerned, it is something more mandatory. You will find that this question of principle is involved where a large number of men are prepared to go out on strike, because they resent very bitterly some act of their employer. You will find that they do not do so without some question of principle being involved. I merely state this. I am expressing my own personal view.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I agree that if one has to make a choice this is the best thing to be done, but I am not convinced that we have to make a choice. We are reinforced in our view by the representations of the trades union congress backed up by the amalgamated engineers&#x2019; union. They say that it is entirely wrong that you should allow a Minister to decide whether the men&#x2019;s belief in their own rectitude is in itself sufficient grounds for the appointment of a conciliation board. That is what we ask for. We are not asking that when, say, men resent the degradation of an individual worker that a verdict should at once be given in their favour, but that a conciliation board should be set up in any case that arouses their resentment. The same thing applies, too, to the employers, for any one employer can ask for a conciliation board to prevent further trouble between him and his employees. I hope the Minister will translate belief into legal action this afternoon. A tremendous advance has taken place in the views of hon. members who passed the original Act a few years ago. I see a happy augury for the future in the attitude of these hon. members, and the Minister need have no fear in asking this side of the House&#x2014;which formerly was opposed to this principle, but now is very much of our way of thinking&#x2014;to agree that it is desirable to invoke the aid of conciliation. Under any and every circumstance, if the workers think a matter of sufficient importance to cause trouble over, or if the organized employers wish &#x201C;to raise the dust&#x201D;, that is warranty for the setting up of a conciliation board. I move the following amendment in the belief that it will be carried by the House, if the Minister signifies his approval&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the following be a new paragraph to follow paragraph (a):</block>

<ol>

<li>(b) by the deletion in sub-section (1) of the word &#x201C;may&#x201D; after the words &#x201C;application the Minister&#x201D;, and the substitution of the word &#x201C;shall&#x201D;;</li>

</ol>

<block name="quote">in line 27, to omit &#x201C;from&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;of&#x201D;; and to omit all the words after &#x201C;sub-section (1)&#x201D;, in the same line, to the end of paragraph (b); in line 34, after &#x201C;any&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;person,&#x201D;; in line 36, after &#x201C;as&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;a duly authorized&#x201D;; and in line 41, after &#x201C;such&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;persons,&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from><span class="col_3959-3960" refersTo="page_2052"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will accept the amendment of the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley), which gives effect to what the Minister believes in. In practice, indeed, he has been carrying out the idea contained in the amendment. The trouble with Cabinet Ministers is that they get it into their heads that they will always be Ministers and that they will administer Acts of Parliament in the way they think right, but&#x2014;fortunately, or unfortunately&#x2014;Ministers come and go, and to-morrow we may have a Minister whose point of view may be entirely different from that of the present incumbent of the office, and he may be hostile to the granting of conciliation boards. That being the case, we might have trouble which might easily have been avoided by the appointment of a conciliation board. More often than not strikes have arisen through obstinacy on the one side or the other, and gradually tempers are aroused and matters develop until you have serious trouble in the country. Why place the onus on the Minister and say that unless the Minister is satisfied that a principle is involved there shall be no conciliation&#x003F; The Minister must not refuse to accept the amendment because it would give effect to our point of view in this matter. We know he has the idea that he is going to be in that place for ever, but personally I do not think he will be there very long. So I do hope that the Minister, in anticipation of that unhappy event, will accept the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The last part of the amendment of the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) cannot be moved by him. He cannot move an amendment to his own amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>My original motion was the deletion of the proviso. I have put all my amendments on the table. If the proviso is not deleted, I want it amended, and I want to have an opportunity of moving that amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Any other hon. member can move that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I will move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To delete the proviso</block>

<p>and my hon. friend (Mr. Kentridge) can move this amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 29, to omit &#x201C;discharge&#x201D;,</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#sturrock">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STURROCK</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not be over-persuaded by my hon. friend on my left. I am quite satisfied as the result of the experience we have had, and if the Minister were to give way to the hon. members on the left, we would have practically every industry having conciliation boards in permanent session. After all, people must get on with their business.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Would it not be good to have permanent conciliation machinery&#x003F; Your argument shows the necessity for it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sturrock">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STURROCK</person>:</from>

<p>It would be unfortunate if every industry had a conciliation board sitting every day and every month and every year. I am afraid I cannot agree with the hon. member in that. I hope the Minister will stand by what he has already said.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot accept this amendment. This body represents the persons most concerned. Any other Minister, even if he were opposed to conciliation, would still be in the position, under the Act, to grant conciliation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I moved the deletion of &#x201C;may&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;shall&#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I am not going back on the compromise on those most closely concerned. The other point relates to the freedom of the selected parties and their right to be completely unfettered as to whom they desire to represent them on the conciliation board. On a matter of broad principle one is bound to agree that they should be unfettered, but as a matter of actual working, first of all men are not going to be members of that board who have not a real immediate acquaintance with the business and are not of a representative character. When the Act was passed, it never occurred to anyone that there was any restriction against there being anybody on the board of another trade union. I do not know in how many cases men were appointed by one party or another who were not members of the organization concerned; but one man, who is well known in South Africa and all through his life has been a very staunch champion of the wage earners, whatever his politics may be, and is a very effective negotiator, was put on a board, and immediately the employers&#x2019; side took legal action and tested the matter in court. It was found he had to be a member of that precise organization. So the freedom of the men and of the employers&#x2019; organization was unduly fettered. I was very glad to see on the part of the employers a very clear disagreement with the action of certain employers whose view was found to be right. Both parties agreed, as a matter of practice, that it is almost inconceivable that a trade union would appoint all its representatives away from its own trade, and as a matter of working practice the trade union or the employers&#x2019; organization could put on the board to represent them members of another organization, so long as the members who are foreign to the particular organization involved, do not exceed in number 50 per cent, of the representatives of such organization. In these matters you want to get men off their &#x201C;high horse&#x201D; and down to the concrete. All the parties were agreed that that would be an immense improvement, and <span class="col_3961-3962" refersTo="page_2053"/>in 99 cases out of a hundred that 50 per cent, would be in excess of the number.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot agree with the Minister&#x2019;s argument on the fundamental question, because here you have views urgently and distinctly represented from the trades union representatives. The Amalgamated Engineering Union is very emphatic about this. They want the whole proviso removed. I must urge the Minister to put the matter right. What is the good of putting it half right&#x003F; If you get a Minister in control of this department later who wants loopholes, there are all the loopholes in the world here.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister talks about compromise, and he refers to the conference that was held I think in January. I think it is almost stretching the matter to call it compromise. My information is that a number of these things were not agreed to unanimously. I am not sure whether this provision was agreed to unanimously between the representatives of the employers and the representatives of the employees or not. My impression is that the employees&#x2019; representatives were dissatisfied. After all, it is stretching a point to say that because a compromise was not unanimously arrived at at that conference, then no change should take place. I hope the Minister will accept the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) seems to be taking advantage of the conciliation of the Minister. There is not much conciliation coining from the cross-benches.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>You are against conciliation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I believe in conciliation, but I believe in a board where you have people who understand the technical affairs of the trade they are discussing. I consider that there should be none of these paid agents on these boards on either side. My ideal of a conciliation board is that the employers of a trade and the employees should get round a table and compose their differences, every man at that table thoroughly understanding the technicalities of the trade. If you are going to have these paid officials on either side, you are going to get two bodies who are out to take advantage of each other, which is what, you don&#x2019;t want on a conciliation board. I accept the compromise, and I ask the hon. members for Benoni and Troyeville (Mr. Madeley and Mr. Kentridge) to take up the same position.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sturrock">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STURROCK</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) referred to the Pretoria conference, and stated that the conference was not unanimous in coming to this particular decision. I should like to tell the hon. member that not only did the employees agree to this, but they agreed to a good bit more. Actually at the suggestion of the employees, supported by employers, it was agreed that not only should these words come out, but that this proviso should read &#x201C;but provided that no conciliation board shall be appointed under this section unless a matter of principle is involved&#x201D;, That is how it was originally decided, on the motion of Mr. Creswell, the commercial employees&#x2019; representative. Afterwards the employers were asked to allow the words to be submitted again as it was thought that this went rather far, and we at once agreed to the wording as it was printed in the Bill. I would urge the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) to accept what was accepted by the employers&#x2019; and the employees&#x2019; representatives at that conference.</p>

<p>First amendment proposed by Mr. Madeley put and negatived.</p>

<p>Question put: That the word &#x201C;from&#x201D; proposed to be omitted stand part of the clause, and a division called.</p>

<p>As fewer than ten members (viz., Messrs. Bates, Christie, Deane, Kentridge and Madeley) voted against the question, the Chairman declared the question affirmed and the amendment proposed by Mr. Madeley dropped.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The names of the minority will be recorded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Is it not permissible for a member of this House to ask that the names of those voting on the other side be recorded?</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by the Minister of Labour put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Remaining amendments put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by select committee, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 7,</p>

<p>On amendments proposed by select committee,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 53, after &#x201C;be&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;transmits to the Minister a statement of the terms of any agreement arrived at and&#x201D;; to insert the following new paragraphs to follow new paragraph (b):</block>

<ol>

<li>(c) by the deletion in paragraph (a) and paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) of the word &#x201C;notify&#x201D; where it occurs and the substitution therefor of the word &#x201C;declare&#x201D;;</li>

<li>(d) by the deletion in paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) of the word &#x201C;applicants&#x201D; and the substitution therefor of the words &#x201C;parties to the agreement&#x201D;;</li>

</ol>

<block name="quote"><span class="col_3963-3964" refersTo="page_2054"/>To omit new paragraph (d), on page 8, and to substitute:</block>

<ol>

<li>(f) by the deletion of sub-section (2) and the substitution therefor of the following sub-section:&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(2) The Minister may by like notice and under similar conditions, at the request of a conciliation board or industrial council as the case may be, publish and make binding upon all employers and employees in the undertaking, industry, trade or occupation in question and within the area defined by him such terms of any award made by any arbitrator, arbitrators or umpire appointed under the provisions of Section 7 as may be specially indicated by the Minister in such notice.</li>

</ol></li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I move the amendments standing in my name, but in a slightly different wording, as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit new paragraph (e) at line 4, on page 8, and to substitute the following&#x2014;</block>

<block name="quote">"(g) by the addition at the end of sub-section (3) of the following provision:</block>

<block name="quote">If such a person is an employer and if such offence consisted of the payment of a wage or rate to any person employed by him lower than that which he was required to pay to such person under the terms of any agreement or award published and made binding under this section the court convicting such employer may also order him to pay into the court an amount equal to the difference between the amount of the wage or rate actually paid by him to such person employed by him and the rate or wage which he should have paid in accordance with such agreement or award. The court may further direct that the whole of such amount, or such part thereof as the court deems equitable having regard to the circumstances under which underpayment took place shall be paid to such person so underpaid, and that any balance of such amount shall be paid into the Consolidated Revenue Fund.</block>

<block name="quote">An order made by a court under the provisions of this sub-section shall have all the effects of and may be executed as if it were a civil judgment in favour of the Crown.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I will give the reasons for this amendment of mine. There are some cases in which there is collusion between the employer and employee to the detriment of the fair employer and to the harm of other employees in that trade. In the original draft of the Bill, the magistrate had, in such cases, the right of refusing to allow an employee who had acted in collusion with the employer, to be paid any amount of the balance of wages which were found to be due to such employee. In this case, one can see that the employer got off with a very much lighter sentence because he did not have to pay the employee the amount of money which should have been due to him. In the Bill as altered now in select committee, the court has to pay the employee, even though the employee or employees have been consistently conspiring with the employer to defeat the conciliation board award. Even though they have consistently done that the magistrate is bound to pay to the employee the full amount of wages which should have been paid to him. The suggestion in my amendment comes to this. I am not prepared to allow the employer to get off. If he has been swindling, he should be made to pay the full extent of his liability. On the other hand, if there are no extenuating circumstances&#x2014;in many instances there are extenuating circumstances, for the employee may be hard up and subject to severe temptation, and the magistrate can say, &#x201C;I consider that this man was sorely tempted by the employer and he should get his wages.&#x201D; If he does not satisfy the magistrate on that point the magistrate can make the employer pay the whole amount into court, and only a certain amount shall be paid to the employee. This matter is one of the most serious points in the whole of the conciliation machinery. I think it is suspected with very great assurance by many of us, that many of those conciliation board awards and wage board awards are not carried out. The hon. Minister will know more in the future than he does to-day, that it is almost impossible, except with an army of inspectors, to inspect every business concern which comes under these awards. There is very grave reason to suspect, in many instances, that these awards are being evaded. I feel that when a man is convicted of evading these awards in one case, it is the employer who is taking an unfair advantage of the decent employee to pay low wages, and the employee is deliberately doing down his fellow workers. When a case is clearly proved, and a conviction got against these people. I say that an example should be made of them and it can only be done by making a fine which can be inflicted to the fullest possible extent. I hope the Minister will see his way to accept this amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I find it somewhat difficult to follow what the hon. member was reading. It is not in precisely the same terms as the amendment on the order paper. This is about the third draft of this amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person></from>

<p>read the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>This amendment in another form the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford) was good enough to show me before he put it on the paper. I think that, undoubtedly, substantial justice is aimed at by the hon. member. I think he and I see eye to eye, as most of us do. In the select committee this matter came up very <span class="col_3965-3966" refersTo="page_2055"/>often. It was pointed out that the man who asked for less than the wages laid down was also culpable. It was asked why he should not get what he asked for. My answer and the answer of others was that, after all, no sane man will usually work or do anything for less than is legally due unless it is under compulsion by way of force majeure. But that by no means is a complete answer. If you take ordinary trade union rules it is never admitted for a moment there is justification for the man taking less than the standard wage because he happens to be in straitened circumstances. If he does he is scabbing and nothing else. On the other hand, I ask the hon. member for Newlands&#x2019; close attention for a moment. There are various degrees of turpitude on the workers&#x2019; side. Take an extreme case&#x2014;a man may take less than his due wage and by doing so he is keeping out of a job a man who has played the game by the agreement. There is no excuse for him at all. One of my hon. friends says that it is no infrequent thing to do before these industrial councils to test whether a man was really carrying out the required standard wage agreement, and for a boss to say that he will reduce the wage by so much an hour, and if a man will accept, say, 30s. per week less he will get the job. A man may go in to work for a fortnight or so, but there may be cases in which a man is so overpoweringly tempted to go back on the agreement because he might be in the utmost financial straits and be without the means of subsistence for his wife and family that he might work for several months at less than the legal rate. In those circumstances, however, if I were a magistrate I should very much be tempted to pay the man the full amount underpaid. On the other hand, one has little or no sympathy for a man who works for less than the determined wage for several months, then has a disagreement with his employer over a minor point, leaves and gives information that this breach of the law as been going on for several months. I suggest to the hon. member that he let his amendment stand over until the report stage and in the interim we can go into it together. I would suggest, however, that the amount a magistrate could award the man should in no case be less than 50 per cent, or 25 per cent, of the total, as I do not want altogether to sacrifice the giving of a reward for exposing these little conspiracies, for the sooner they come into the open the more chance you have of checking them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The last part of the amendment is out of order, as no monies can be paid into the consolidation revenue fund without the consent of the Governor-General.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>We might give that authority.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>In that case then we might hand the money to the industrial councils who have certain expenses in connection with their work. Before accepting the Minister&#x2019;s suggestion, I may say that I agree that in the natural course of events generally the employees are less to blame for accepting wages below the proper scale as naturally they are subject to great temptation when they are out of work to accept less than the proper wage. But under my amendment the magistrate has absolute discretion because in taking evidence as to the comparative culpability of these two persons, if he thought the employee, considering the circumstances in which he was, was tempted to a very great extent, I think he would give that employee the total amount of underpaid wages. If we allow any balance to go to the industrial countil instead of to the consolidated revenue fund, the magistrate would not be tempted to lend a hand to the Government. I hope before we get to the report stage, we will come to some agreed motion.</p>

<p>With leave of committee amendment proposed by Mr. Stuttaford withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I now find the Minister proposes to delete from the section any obligation to publish the agreement, and to publish a statement of the terms of the agreement. What does he mean by that&#x2014;not the words of the agreement. I trust the committee will not vote for that amendment, because, after all, we are dealing with people not concerned in any agreement and made subject to it, and the least that can be done is that the whole terms of the enactment should be published, just as it has always been done.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by the Minister of Labour put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendments, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On new Clause 8,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 10, after &#x201C;seven&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or section eleven or by an agreement published and made binding by the Minister under the provisions of section nine&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>New clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 10,</p>

<p>On amendments proposed by select committee,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 52, after &#x201C;with&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;and by the deletion of the words There shall be a right of appeal to the Minister against the decision of the registrar&#x201D; and the substitution therefor of the words &#x2018;: Provided that whenever the registrar has reason to believe that persons other than the applicants would be affected by the desired registration he shall publish in the Gazette a notice specifying the particulars of the application and inviting any person to submit to him in writing within one month of the publication of such notice any objection which he may have to such registration &#x2019;&#x201D;; in line 54, to omit <span class="col_3967-3968" refersTo="page_2056"/>&#x201C;and (9)&#x201D; and to substitute, &#x201C;(9) and (10)&#x201D;; in lines 2 and 3, on page 12, to omit &#x201C;in case of demand by the registrar&#x201D;; and after line 49, to add the following new subsection:</block>

<ol>

<li>(10) Any person who objects to any decision of the registrar under this section may appeal to the Minister, who may either confirm, vary or set aside the registrar&#x2019;s decision.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>Here is another instance of this constant tendency, on the part of the Government, to take away the rights of the people. The Minister now proposes to prevent a decision by the registrar of trades unions from being corrected by the courts of this country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is barking up the wrong tree in this case. The Act as it at present stands gives the Minister the decision. A body of persons may apply for registration in a trade union. They have to satisfy the Minister that they are the only representative body. If he refuses to register they have a right to appeal to the Minister under the Act. But there may be other trade unions who are interested in the matter. They may desire to put before the registrar that it is a body not sufficiently represented. If the registrar is not satisfied when this application is made to him, he may by notice in the Gazette notify that application has been made and invite persons having objections to lodge them. Then he exercises his own judgment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>There is one very big omission here. The registrar has been given greater power here than under the original Act. If, after registration other factors come to his knowledge of which he was not aware at the time of registration, he should have the power to cancel the registration.</p>

<p>Amendments put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendments, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 12,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In lines 50 and 51, to omit &#x201C;in the area specified in such certificate&#x201D;; and in lines 53 and 54, to omit &#x201C;specified in such certificate</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 13,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 9, after &#x201C;section&#x201D; to add &#x201C;in respect of the persons to whom such records relate&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 14,</p>

<p>On amendments proposed by select committee,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 13, after &#x201C;nine&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;of the principal Act as amended by this Act&#x201D;; in lines 13 and 14, to omit &#x201C;the inspector&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;any officer designated by the Minister under the provisions of subsection (1) of Section 13 hereof&#x201D;; and in line 17, to omit &#x201C;the inspector&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;such officer&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendments, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>The title having been agreed to,</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported with amendments; to be considered on 12th May.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#apprenticeship_(amendment)_bill">

<heading>APPRENTICESHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Third Order read: House to go into committee on the Apprenticeship (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<p>House In Committee:</p>

<p>Business suspended at 6 p.m. and resumed at 8.5 p.m.</p>

<debateSection name="#evening_sitting">

<heading>Evening Sitting.</heading>

<p>On Clause 1,</p>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 15, after &#x201C;may,&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;on the authority of a resolution passed by both Houses of Parliament,&#x201D;.</block>

<p>The object of the amendment is to assert the authority of Parliament. Certain industries to which this Act is applicable have been specified by Parliament, but in the amended Bill now before us, the Minister of Labour may, of his own volition, on giving three months&#x2019; notice, either add to or delete from that schedule any industry which he thinks fit. I am one of those people who resent the present tendency of Governments&#x2014;not our Government only, for it is a disease which attacks all people in power&#x2014; to override Parliament and to do things without the consent of Parliament. This is a very fair sample of that tendency. My view is that, when Parliament lays down that a certain number of industries should come under this Act, and no others, it is the duty of the Government to carry out the instructions of Parliament. To carry the argument to an absurdity, you may have a Minister coming into power at some future time who may delete all the industries in the schedule, and practically do away with an Act of Parliament. I do not think that is likely, but it is carrying things to an absurdity if the Minister has to decide what industries are subject to this Act, and what industries are not. I recognize the Minister <span class="col_3969-3970" refersTo="page_2057"/>would naturally say he might want to make a small change in the schedule, add a small industry to the list, or delete one of very small value, and it is a very cumbersome thing to come to Parliament with a Bill, which requires a great deal of machinery to put through. I do not wish to put the Minister to that trouble, but if he does wish to do any of these things, I want him to get a resolution of both Houses of Parliament authorizing him to do so, and in that way Parliament maintains its control over the legislation of the country. Under this Bill, as drafted, the Minister has agreed to give three months&#x2019; notice of his intention to add to or delete from the schedule. Parliament sits from January to June, and during these months the Minister can get through any amendment of the Act by a resolution of the House more quickly than by his proposal. When the House is not in session there are only three months to delay him, and if the Minister has not made up his mind before Parliament is prorogued, there cannot be much urgency about the matter, so that the three months does not make much difference. I feel it is due to us, as the people who are responsible for the legislation of the country, that, when the Minister wants to make an alteration, he should come to the House with a resolution. That is a simple thing, and there are no first, second and third readings; Mr. Speaker will be in the Chair; an hon. member will be allowed to speak only once, and the Minister will have the right to reply. The dice are weighted in his favour, but Parliament has the chance of saying whether it is agreeable to his suggestion or not. The Minister may want to add a section to a trade in the schedule or divide any trade in the schedule into two sections, and there may be great differences of opinion even as far as the Labour members on the cross benches are concerned, whether it is wise to do so. It is one way in which publicity can be got, and to enable the community to lay its views before Parliament. I hope the Minister will see the extraordinary reasonableness of this proposal, and acquiesce in such a small amendment as this.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want to do anything which goes against the proper functions of Parliament. I can quite understand in the initiation of such legislation as this, until you feel your way, Parliament should say we confine it to such and such a thing: but for some comparatively small industries to bring this matter before Parliament and to obtain a resolution of both Houses before we can bring it under the Apprenticeship Act seems to be out of all proportion to the importance of the subject. There is undoubtedly a tendency&#x2014;not here, but everywhere&#x2014;for Parliament to delegate to the executive a number of what might be called minor legislative functions, and we pass an Act enabling the Minister or the Governor-General to make regulations. That does not arise from any other cause than from the fact that when the social and legislative needs of our modern life become more and more complex, it is not possible for Parliament to lay down more than the principles, and leave the details to the administration. What a lot of time it would take for Parliament otherwise! I gladly accepted this precaution, because there is no attempt to rush it. The Apprenticeship Act is wholly useless as applied to industries until and unless you ascertain that the people in that industry, both employers and employees, have some sort of organization, and are agreeable to co-operate under the Act, otherwise it is putting a burden on Parliament which it should not have. With this notice every safeguard that can be asked for is there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I must say the Minister of Labour completely puzzles me. I can remember reading his speeches in which the hon. member almost died on the floor of the House in protesting against the rights of the people being interfered with. It is surprising how the allurements of office bring about a change of outlook. I would like to point out to him that the great danger in connection with this industrial legislation is that he may go too fast, and that he may legislate in advance of public opinion. It is a most surprising thing that whilst the Industrial Conciliation Act has been operating for nearly five or six years without any compulsion, his Wage Act has been a source of constant friction, all because the hon. gentleman wants to go too far. One of the first things that should be done is to ascertain whether the employers and employees desire to have the far-reaching effects of that Act applied to them. I should have thought that the Minister would have laid down some initial test, that some sort of representation should be made to him by employers or employees before the Minister would take the important step of extending the scope of the Apprenticeship Act. I think it is most desirable that Parliament should have an opportunity of considering it. The Minister&#x2019;s point is that there are so many industries that are small, it should be unnecessary to consult Parliament, but in 1922 Parliament was consulted about the schedule of the Act, and I cannot see why that procedure cannot be followed now. The Minister makes no provision as to what is to take place when objections are lodged. This is not a mere matter of form. Unless he secures a volume of public opinion behind him, he may do great harm. It is important that Parliament should retain control over a matter of this kind, and I cordially support what has been said by the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I am not afraid of the speed of this legislation; at the same time I am prepared to support the amendment. I am afraid we have been taking away power from Parliament. The power to investigate is an important duty Parliament has had. I have had representations from the engineering union, who are rather perturbed about the power the Minister proposes to take to add to or detract from the industries included in the schedule by proclamation by the Governor-General. They say they cannot agree to this, and that the Minister should submit to Parliament any industry be may wish to add to the present schedule. <span class="col_3971-3972" refersTo="page_2058"/>Every one of the industries mentioned in the schedule has some representative of the engineering trade in some occupation or other within those industries, so that you will understand the vital interest this matter has for the engineers&#x2019; union, and to a lesser extent for the boilermakers&#x2019; union. They fear sub-division more than anything else. They say that in the question of apprenticeship to the engineering trade they should have a voice all over the Union, and they want continuity. They feel that by sub-dividing the industries there is a probability of their losing their interest in their own branch of trade in connection with any particular industry in a particular area, especially as the Minister takes powers to define the areas rather rigidly. For that reason, plus the fact that I feel in my bones it is a very bad thing indeed to take away the power of Parliament to act and investigate, I am prepared to support the amendment. It is a mere resolution, and there will not be very much delay. It gives time for reflection. Under the circumstances, I would implore the Minister to agree to the amendment. There would be no loss of dignity; rather the reverse. The amalgamated engineering union do hot come to a decision without the closest possible scrutiny of the whole circumstances, and when they do recommend something you can act upon it. I urge the Minister to accept this amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#henderson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HENDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot support the amendment moved by the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford). In Section 11 of the original Act, it provides that&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Subject to the provisions of this section, the Minister may establish for any defined area an apprenticeship committee to advise him in accordance with this Act when all matters connected with the condition governing apprenticeship in any scheduled industry within that area.</block>

<p>I see no real danger; I think that the amendment is probably very largely provided for by the clause I have read. There can be no urgency since an apprenticeship committee has been formed and is functioning. I therefore oppose the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>It seems to me that the only grounds put forward for the amendment which the hon. member has proposed is that we should try to restrict its application. If he had listened to the evidence given generally as to the greatly increased workshop efficiency under the working of this Act, in the industries to which it is applied, we should not fear its application to other industries. This Act has also popularized apprenticeship, and its popularity has led to tremendous pressure of applications for apprenticeship. I regret very much that when this Act was passed we could not see any more industries available to include in the schedule, although there would have been no difficulty at the time in getting more industries included had they existed. I want to point out that there may be quite a suitable industry to-day to which this Act cannot be applied, because there is not the organization necessary to constitute an apprenticeship committee, but in time that industry might become in a position to carry on an apprenticeship system. I could understand the difficulty if apprenticeship were a contentious matter. It is very important to have more and more apprenticeship for the boys of this country. Of course, if you pass an amendment like this it seems as if Parliament is trying to discourage apprenticeships. You leave the way open to Parliament to step in and say they do not want to extend it. This is not the place to apply a principle of this kind. It should be the desire to secure the co-operation of organized bodies to throw open to apprenticeship all possible avenues of training for employment for the country, so that more boys can be trained instead of being left on the streets as they are at the present time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>One concedes all that. What we are anxious about is that the fullest investigation and opportunity for information should be obtained and, at the same time, breaking that veil of secrecy which covers these things. The amalgamated engineering union do not give expression to their ideas without having thought deeply on the matter. They have as brainy men in the amalgamated engineering union as we have in Parliament. To-day you have your motor-car industry which is growing very rapidly. Super-imposed upon that, although not of the same method, you have aircraft rapidly developing in this country. The engineering trade says these two industries are rightfully due, so far as apprenticeship is concerned, to come under the jurisdiction of the amalgamated engineering union. I claim that for them. It is the same method of building of engines and construction, and the same skill is required in manufacturing parts and assembling them. I can scarcely explain all the ramifications of the engineering industry, with which the tradesmen engaged in that industry are fully cognisant. They say this: &#x201C;Supposing this develops,&#x201D; they might demand that &#x201C;you set up that as an industry and you schedule it.&#x201D; At the moment, I shall not argue that it is wrong, although I feel it is, but they may ask the Minister to schedule it as an independent industry. We have not had time to examine or to think about it. Those people would at once say it is wrong. The motor industry would say it is right, and the Minister would have to decide between them. On the spur of the moment he may say that the motor industry is correct, and schedule it. We should have no opportunity in Parliament of altering that unless we bring in an amending Bill. A private member has no hope of amending an Act in that fashion. Let us take time by the forelock, and say that with a case like that we shall consider the whole question over again. That will make for safety, and I urge with all my power that the amalgamated engineering union is correct in its argument that no new industry should be added. The Minister can take off any industry from the purview of apprenticeship committees. I think a case has been made out for the amendment of the hon. member. It may be that I am viewing it from <span class="col_3973-3974" refersTo="page_2059"/>a different angle from that of the hon. member. From the trade union point of view, these arguments are perfectly sound, and I leave them to the discretion of the committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member who speaks with such authority appears to have forgotten that there is an even more widespread union than the engineering union. Mr. Andrews and Mr. Sachs appeared before the select committee as general secretary and a member of the executive of the South African trades&#x2019; union congress, respectively. Mr. Andrews, in giving evidence, said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">We have not a great deal to complain of in the proposed amendments to the Apprenticeship Act. We have no criticism or observation to make in regard to Clause 1 of the Apprenticeship Amendment Bill. You point out that there is some difference of opinion in regard to paragraph (c) of this clause, which provides a new sub-section (2) to Section 1 to the principal Act giving the Governor-General power to delete any of the industries in the first schedule of the Act, or to add new industries. The power rests with the Minister now, and I thought that industries had been added to this list from time to time. I should say that the proposed provision is an improvement, because it might be convenient to put industries, or sections of industries, on to the list to which the Act applies, and to do this by Act of Parliament would involve a long delay. I think we would agree that giving this power to the Governor-General is an improvement.</block>

<p>I should not like to take the hon. member&#x2019;s statement that the trades union is dead against it, because it is not correct.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I wish the hon. Minister had not stopped short at that interesting extract. It is true that Mr. Andrews gave his evidence, but he expressed himself somewhat doubtfully in the Minister&#x2019;s proposal. He was cross-examined by the hon. member for Turffontein (Mr. Sturrock), who is developing a strong forensic bent. I want to refer to his cross-examination&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">I agree that this power would have to be exercised with discretion, and there would have to be a strong case made before such a trade is designated. You point out that there might be a desire to have a separate apprenticeship committee, and ask me whether that is not a matter which Parliament should settle rather than leave it to the discretion of the Minister to make up his mind, and, in reply to that, I must say that it never occurred to me as being of such importance as requiring Parliament to do it. I may be wrong, however, in this view.</block>

<p>That is the chief witness for the Minister. He goes on to say&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">I agree with you that very wide powers are given to the apprenticeship committees under the Apprenticeship Act, and when such wide powers are given to the Minister, it is desirable that Parliament should have some check on those powers.</block>

<p>Does the hon. gentleman want me to read any more&#x003F; He further says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">I have no strong feeling either way as to whether this should be controlled by Parliament or by the Minister.</block>

<p>I think that the Minister was working on slender grounds in pressing this amendment on the attention of the House. He read the first portion of Mr. Andrews&#x2019; evidence, and he forgot about the rest. If, out of the mouth of this witness, we are to be convinced, then we have to direct his attention to the other evidence which strongly supports the hon. member on my left (Mr. Madeley).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>Do you call this strong support?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>You were quoting it as the gospel upon which you have founded your amendment. I very much appreciate the beautiful sentiments he expressed in regard to the Apprenticeship Act which has done a wonderful amount of good, but some hon. members stop short when they speak of the authorship of that Act. No one would be louder in singing his praises than the members on this side of the House, as their party was responsible for its introduction, and therefore ensured thousands of apprentices becoming as good journeymen as are to be found in any part of the world. Is it conceivable, therefore, that by any amendments we should seek to damage that record&#x003F; We ask the Minister to do nothing to jeopardize the Act. The hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) has shown how little the Minister has consulted trade union opinion. I wonder how many employers and trade union organizations the Minister has consulted&#x003F; Here, again, we see that autocratic tendency which has been such a marked feature of the Labour Department since the Minister and his predecessor had charge of it. The danger of autocracy is that it legislates against public opinion, and then it makes charges against judges, lawyers, and so on.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is going a little too far.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sturrock">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STURROCK</person>:</from>

<p>Once more we are carrying the argument a little too far. It is no use the Minister scheduling an industry unless he is satisfied that once it is scheduled, there will be people willing to administer it. It is useless to schedule an industry unless the Minister is satisfied that the employers and employees in that industry are anxious for it to be scheduled. It is quite obvious that under no circumstances could an industry be scheduled unless it desires to be included under the Act. It is purely a matter for the industry itself. Parliament need not worry. If an industry desires to be scheduled let it approach the Minister. The hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) has referred to the fact that the motor engineers are very anxious to break away from <span class="col_3975-3976" refersTo="page_2060"/>the amalgamated society of engineers. On the whole, I am opposed to the breaking up of industries in this way, but in these days of specialization the amalgamated society of engineers cannot hope for all time to hold all branches of engineering. A certain amount of latitude should be given in the breaking up of such a very widespread industry. I hope the House will not delay too long over this amendment. I think, on the whole, the select committee has met the position in this particular case, and I do not think this committee will go very far wrong if it adheres to the recommendation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Turffontein (Mr. Sturrock) has told us that he was trained as a journeyman fitter, but his arguments lead me to the conclusion that his training was a very poor one, as he said it would not justify him in dealing with an aeroplane engine. It would be extraordinary if a properly trained engineer could not tackle any part of an aeroplane engine. The Minister&#x2019;s arguments are the strongest we have listened to to-night in favour of the amendment. With heavy sarcasm he sought to discredit me as a witness, but only succeeded in discrediting himself. My hon. friend here in reading to the end of that particular item of evidence showed that the Minister was wrong. Let me, in passing, say at once that I do not claim to represent the whole of the trade union movement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I thought you did last night.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I am speaking for today. I was very careful to say these were the representatives of the Amalgamated Engineering Union. It is very interesting, when the very men the Minister mentioned, Mr. Andrews and Mr. Sacks, had scorn poured on them by the Minister of Justice under the Riotous Assemblies (Amendment) Act. They deliberately set down the effect of the Minister&#x2019;s proposals, and in consequence of their investigations they decided to oppose them. Let us see the evidence of this gentleman on whom the Minister built his case. First, the Minister built up a house of straw, and then he knocked it down. In reply to the hon. member for Germiston (Mr. Brown), Mr. Andrews said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">This point was not discussed by the South African trade union congress, and what I have said in connection with this matter is my own personal opinion;</block>

<p>and yet the Minister holds up the evidence of Mr. Andrews as knocking down my case and my claim to represent the Amalgamated Engineering Union&#x2019;s deliberate decision on this point. The Minister&#x2019;s own argument shows how dangerous it is, when Parliament is not to have the ultimate control of the scheduling or non-scheduling of industries. They are very much afraid of this splitting up. There will soon be an amalgamation with the boilermakers, and the whole &#x201C;black squad,&#x201D; as we call it, will be one. In a union such as this you have the best brains and the most knowledgeable minds it is possible to get hold of. No, the Minister must find something else than Mr. Andrews&#x2019; evidence to knock down the claims of the Amalgamated Engineering Union.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I would ask the committee to come to a conclusion now. We have discussed this for nearly one hour. Every argument has been brought out, and the hon. member for Benoni. (Mr. Madeley) and the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter) have had their opportunity of once more expressing their personal entire disapprobation of my unworthy self, so let us now vote on the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to point out I have not yet had an opportunity of replying to anything which has been said on my amendment. I feel as strongly about it as when I started. My original objection was against the Minister, or anybody, usurping an Act of Parliament without coming to Parliament. When I listened to the arguments of the hon. member for Turffontein (Mr. Sturrock), I thought to myself, &#x201C;What has the select committee been doing here&#x003F;&#x201D; If that is the view of that committee, why do they not take out the schedule altogether&#x2014;if it is to be altered at the whim of the Minister&#x003F; The Minister said there might be some reason for my suggestion in the early stages of the working of the Act, in 1922, when it was not quite certain what was the value to the industries which had been put on. But the Minister had eight years to settle what industries should come under the Act. He has had a select committee only a week or two ago, considering this Act. Surely after this, if there had been any industries he wished to add to the schedule, it would have been a perfectly easy thing to do. So far from my suggestion being necessary only in the early stages, it is infinitely more necessary now, when every possible industry he wants scheduled is scheduled. The Minister said it had always been within the power of a Minister to issue regulations under an Act. Surely he sees the difference between that and a decision altering (the Act. The regulations can be made only within the terms of the Act, but in this case the Minister can amend the Act without coming to Parliament. The Minister also said there was a precaution in the clause, and that he gives three months&#x2019; notice. What precaution is that&#x003F; No precaution whatever. The Minister has got the Mussolini touch, and the only thing I am careful about is not to give him the Mussolini power. I don&#x2019;t understand the speech of the hon. member for Hospital (Mr. Henderson). As far as I can <span class="col_3977-3978" refersTo="page_2061"/>see, his references to Clause 11 have nothing to do with the case in any shape or form. The objection of the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs is that Parliament might step in and stop the extension of the schedule. Surely Parliament has a right even to stop the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs! That argument seems to require no reply. As regards the hon. member for Turffontein (Mr. Sturrock), he said the Minister could not schedule an industry unless he had an apprenticeship committee behind him to carry it out. It might be against the interests of trade to have an industry scheduled, but a section not working with the general body of the industry might come along and say, &#x201C;we will form an apprenticeship committee&#x201D;, I think that is a reason why Parliament should have the power to investigate. Everything that has been said to-night is in favour of the adoption of my amendment, and I ask the Minister to accept it. The hon. member for Hospital (Mr. Henderson) suggested that there would be a delay of 12 months. There would not be a delay of 12 months, and on the question of time there is nothing in it. On the question of the authority of Parliament there is everything in it, and there is particularly everything in it when we have one of the Ministers getting up and saying he objects to it being brought before Parliament because Parliament might stop it. That is the most extraordinary argument I have ever heard a Minister of the Crown put forward against a resolution.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I am not going to support the amendment of the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford), and for the very reason the hon. member has stated. He says: &#x201C;Come with a single resolution to this House&#x201D;, but I hope Parliament will not amend any Act of Parliament by a simple resolution of the House. That does not mean that I agree with the amendment in the Bill, because I do not agree with that either. I also have had communications respecting this matter, and I think the danger that the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) speaks of does exist. In Cape Town I have had an opportunity of discussing the matter, not only with the trades union side, but also with the employers&#x2019; side&#x2014;a very prominent man in the industrial council here, whose words to me were, that if there was any division coming, and if the motor traders were granted an apprenticeship committee or an industrial council for themselves, it would burst up the engineering agreement. I would rather see the whole of this dropped, and the principal Act remain as it is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eaton">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">EATON</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think the hon. member for Germiston (Mr. Brown) has got the hang of this amendment. Actually what is intended is that any new organization can be brought in under the schedule by a resolution of Parliament. I think hon. members on the cross-benches are labouring under a misapprehension. In my own industry, the building industry, there is an amalgamation of nine trade unions connected with building work. I do not know why hon. members on the cross-benches should fear disintegration within their union. Industrial legislation, I have found, has had the effect of leading to amalgamation and not to disintegration. Industrial legislation of this kind is bringing about large combinations of employers on the one side and combinations of employees on the other. I would support the amendment of the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford), but when we have the other side meeting us half-way, let us he prepared to compromise.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>So far from adopting the advice of the hon. member for Durban (County) (Mr. Eaton), I am inclined to follow that given by the hon. member for Germistor (Mr. Brown). The Minister should not be entitled to add to schedules of industry in connection with this Act. I attach great importance to the testimony of the hon. member for Germiston and the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley), and they both agree that it is undesirable that the Minister should have the right to add to and delete from the schedule. As it stands, the Governor-General may, by proclamation in the Gazette, remove any industry from the jurisdiction of this House. I therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To delete the words &#x201C;both Houses of Parliament&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;an Act of Parliament&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to point out that this amendment would make the whole clause look absurd. To meet the idea of the hon. gentleman, he can move the deletion of the whole sub-clause (c).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit paragraph (c).</block>

<p>Question put: That all the words in paragraph (c) down to &#x201C;may&#x201D; in line 15, proposed to be omitted, stand part of the clause.</p>

</speech>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;60.</p>

<p>Alberts, S. F.</p>

<p>Bowie, J. A.</p>

<p>Bremer, K.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>De Jager, H. J. C.</p>

<p>De Sousa, E.</p>

<p>De Sousa, E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Du Toit, C. W. M.</p>

<p>Du Toit, C. W. M.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Haywood, J. J.</p>

<p>Henderson, R. H.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J D.</p>

<p>Hofmeyr, J. H.</p>

<p>Jansen, E. G.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p><span class="col_3979-3980" refersTo="page_2062"/>Lamprecht, H. A.</p>

<p>Lawrence, H. G.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>McIlwraith, E R.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, S. VV.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pocock, P. V.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Roberts, F. J.</p>

<p>Rockey. W.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Shaw, F</p>

<p>Steyn, G. P.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strydom, J. G.</p>

<p>Sturrock, F. C.</p>

<p>Swanepoel, A. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, R. A. T.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Verster, J. I). H.</p>

<p>Visser, W. J. M.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J</p>

<p>Waterson, S. F.</p>

<p>YVentzel, L. M.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Malan, M. L.; O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;10.</p>

<p>Acutt, F. H</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Chiappini, A. T.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Nicoll, V. L.</p>

<p>Stallard, C. F</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Tellers: Coulter. C. W. A.; Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Question accordingly affirmed and the amendment proposed by Mr. Madeley dropped.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Stuttaford put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended by select committee, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 2,</p>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;trade&#x201D; in line 46 to " months&#x201D; in line 50.</block>

<p>I do that because the effect of this amendment, as proposed by the Minister, would be to allow any employer to take on a lad for six months or less than six months, without indenturing him. He may find that the lad is not good enough or that the work does not suit the lad, and the employer decides to let the youth go. Six months have been lost to the boy and he has to begin all over again in another trade that might suit him. It is easy to conceive that it will not be long before the lad will lose his available youth in trying to find a niche in which to fit himself. The other point is that the employer might get rid of the boy after employing him for nearly six months. Two or three months afterwards, he might take the lad on again or some other employer might take him. That employer still has six months to play with. In that way the boy&#x2019;s outlook on life can be completely destroyed. I do not claim to represent the whole of the trade union movement in South Africa, but I do claim to represent the amalgamated engineering union who are very anxious indeed about this matter. If a lad is indentured, and if, within a short time it is found that he will never be able to learn the trade, you can usually arrange&#x2014;with the consent of the employer and the parents to have the articles of indenture cancelled. If it is explained to the father that his boy will never make, say, a carpenter or a fitter, why keep him at that particular trade for six months as that time will be wasted, but in the way the Minister desires it neither the parent nor the boy has any hope.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 20, on page 4, after &#x201C;employer&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;in the manner prescribed by regulation</block>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Madeley put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by the Minister of Labour put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 3,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add the following new paragraph to follow paragraph (b):</block>

<ol>

<li>(c) by the insertion of the following new subsection (5):&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(5) No contract of apprenticeship shall be rendered invalid by reason of any de feet in a notice issued under this Act or of any error or omission on the part of the inspector or an apprenticeship committee.</li>

</ol></li>

</ol>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On new Clause 8,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 62, to omit &#x201C;shall&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;may&#x201D;; and in line 16, on page 8, to omit &#x201C;courses&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;classes&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>New Clause 8, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 9,</p>

<p>On new paragraph (a) proposed by select committee,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In lines 43 and 44, to omit &#x201C;the Railways and Harbours Administration or in any Government department; and <i>&#x201D;</i> and to substitute &#x201C;any State department including the Administration of Railways and Harbours</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>New paragraph, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from><span class="col_3981-3982" refersTo="page_2063"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move-</p>

<block name="quote">That the following be a new paragraph to follow paragraph (a):</block>

<ol>

<li>(b) by the deletion of paragraph (g) and the substitution therefor of the following new paragraph:&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(g) it may receive any application for registration of a contract of apprenticeship with a view to transmitting it and reporting upon it to the inspector, and shall further report on any matter concerning apprenticeship referred to it by the Minister or inspector;</li>

</ol></li>

</ol>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On new Clause 12,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>1 move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 54, to omit &#x201C;section&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;sections four and in line 6, on page 12, to omit &#x201C;inspector&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;secretary of the apprenticeship committee concerned</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>New clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 13,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 17, to omit &#x201C;after&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;the first new definition to precede and the second to follow&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause 17 and title having been agreed to,</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported with amendments; to be considered on 12th May.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#wage_(amendment)_bill">

<heading>WAGE (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Fourth Order read: House to go into committee on the Wage (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<p>House In Committee:</p>

<p>On Clause 2,</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 38, to omit &#x201C;labour&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;employment&#x201D;,</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 5,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 3, to omit &#x201C;a&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;any</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 6,</p>

<p>On amendments proposed by select committee in lines 36 to 50,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit sub-section (3) of the new section seven and to substitute the following new sub-section:</block>

<ol>

<li>(3) Upon consideration of a recommendation to which after publication under the provisions of sub-section (1) no objection has been lodged, or to which an objection has been lodged and considered by the board under the provisions of sub-section (2) but which has not been amended by the board, or upon receipt of a recommendation amended under the provisions of sub-section (2), the Minister, may make a determination which shall be in accordance with the recommendation or, if the recommendation has been amended, in accordance with the amended recommendation, save that the Minister may exclude from the determination for such period as he may from time to time determine any section of a trade or any area or part of any area embraced within the recommendation. Any determination in accordance with an amended recommendation may be made without any publication of such amendment in terms of sub-section (1).</li>

</ol>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>On new Section 7 A, proposed by select committee,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In lines 17, 19, 23, 26, 28 and 33, respectively, after &#x201C;trade&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or section of trade&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>New section, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 7,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I have an amendment on the paper. I do not want to waste the time of the committee. If the Minister would prefer that I should move it at the report stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I think we can do it at the report stage.</p>

<p>On Clause 8,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<p>In line 16, on page 10, to insert the following new paragraph to follow paragraph (c):</p>

<ol>

<li>(d) by the deletion in paragraph (e) of subsection (1) of the words &#x201C;every wage-sheet, pay sheet, time-sheet, or approved <span class="col_3983-3984" refersTo="page_2064"/>record&#x201D; and the substitution therefor of the words &#x201C;all such records as are referred to in paragraph (a)&#x201D;, paragraph (e) becoming paragraph (d);</li>

</ol>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 9,</p>

<p>On new sub-section (4) proposed by select committee,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 27, to omit &#x201C;the&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;an</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Sub-section, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 64, to omit &#x201C;is a genuine partnership&#x201D;; and in the same line, after &#x201C;other contract&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;was&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 10,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>Should the short title not be&#x201D; The Wage Act (Amendment) Act&#x201D;, and not &#x201C;Wage (Amendment) Act&#x201D;,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I think it should be that. I move as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">After &#x201C;Wage&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;Act&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>The title having been agreed to,</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported with amendments; to be considered on 12th May.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1930-05-09T22:00:00">10 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

