---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - FRIDAY 17 JANUARY 1930'
layout: debate
year: 1930
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading><span class="col_1-2" refersTo="page_0069"/>FRIDAY, 17th JANUARY, 1930.</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT.</heading>

<p>Pursuant to the proclamation of H.E. the Governor-General dated 25th November, 1929, summoning Parliament to meet this day for the despatch of business, members met in the Assembly Chamber and Mr. Speaker took the chair at <recordedTime time="1930-01-17T15:08:00">3.8 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

<p>The CLERK read the Proclamation.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacant_seats">

<heading>VACANT SEATS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that during the recess, vacancies occurred in the representation in this House of the following electoral divisions, viz.:&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Johannesburg (North) on the 31st August, 1929. owing to the death of Mr. L. Geldenhuys.</li>

<li>(2) Gordonia, on the 6th September, 1929, owing to the resignation of Mr. J. H. Conradie.</li>

<li>(3) Gezina, on the 11th September, 1929, owing to the resignation of Mr. B. J. Pienaar.</li>

<li>(4) Bethal, on the 25th October, 1929, owing to the resignation of the Hon. T. J. de V. Roos.</li>

<li>(5) Stellenbosch, on the 30th October, 1929, owing to the resignation of Mr. W. B. de Villiers.</li>

<li>(6) Port Elizabeth (South), on the 19th November, 1929, owing to the death of Sir William Macintosh.</li>

<li>(7) Natal Coast, on the 20th December, 1929, owing to the death of Brig.-Gen. Arnott.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read letters from the Acting Secretary to the Prime Minister, dated the 8th October, the 25th October and the 30th December, respectively, reporting the election of the following members for the representation of the electoral divisions stated, viz.&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Chari Wynand Markilbach du Toit for the electoral division of Edenburg, in the room of the Hon. F. W. Beyers, resigned.</li>

<li>(2) Adrian Paulus Johannes Fourie for the electoral division of Gordonia, in the room of Mr. J. H. Conradie, resigned.</li>

<li>(3) Oswald Pirow for the electoral division of Gezina, in the room of Mr. B. J. Pienaar, resigned.</li>

<li>(4) Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr for the electoral division of Johannesburg (North), in the room of Mr. L. Geldenhuys, deceased.</li>

<li>(5) Edwin Robert McIlwraith for the electoral division of Port Elizabeth (South) in the room of Sir William Macintosh, deceased.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath_or_affirmation_of_allegiances">

<heading>OATH OR AFFIRMATION OF ALLEGIANCES.</heading>

<p>The Hon. A. P. J. Fourie, introduced by the Minister of the Interior and Mr. Roux, and Mr. Hofmeyr, introduced by Mr. Duncan and Col.-Cdt. Collins, made and subscribed to the oath and took their seats.</p>

<p>The Rev. C. W. M. du Toit, introduced by Dr. D. G. Conradie and Mr. Swart, made and subscribed to the affirmation and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read a letter from the Acting Secretary to the Prime Minister, dated the 9th December, 1929, stating that his Excellency the Governor-General had signified his intention of opening Parliament at half-past three o&#x2019;clock to-day with the usual ceremony.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER and members proceeded to the Senate House to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament.</p>

<p><span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0070"/>Mr. SPEAKER resumed the Chair at 3.50 p.m.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#roll_of_members">

<heading>ROLL OF MEMBERS.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read the list of members, when those present answered to their names.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#printing_committee">

<heading>PRINTING COMMITTEE.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the Prime Minister and Mr. Krige a Committee to assist Mr. Speaker in regard to the printing of the House.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#committee_on_standing_rules_and_orders">

<heading>COMMITTEE ON STANDING RULES AND ORDERS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the following members to constitute, with Mr. Speaker, the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders, viz.: The Prime Minister, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs, the Minister of Native Affairs, Gen. Smuts, Mr. Krige, Mr. Duncan, the Rev. Mr. Hattingh, Col.-Cdt. Collins and Mr. Close.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_speech">

<heading>OPENING SPEECH.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER reported that the House had this day attended the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and that H.E. the Governor-General was pleased to deliver an opening speech to both Houses of Parliament, as follows&#x2014;</p>

<p>Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the House Of Assembly:</p>

<p>I am pleased to be able to inform you that our relations with the other Members of the Commonwealth, and with foreign nations continue to be most friendly and cordial.</p>

<p>Our Envoys Extraordinary and Ministers Plenipotentiary to the Netherlands, Italy and the United States of America have presented their Credentials, and have been cordially received. I have great pleasure in announcing that the Governments of these Countries are reciprocating by sending Envoys Extraordinary and Ministers Plenipotentiary to the Union, and that the representatives of the Netherlands and Italy have already been duly accredited.</p>

<p>The Union has accepted the Optional Clause contained in Article 36 of the Statutes of the Permanent Court of International Justice, thereby agreeing to submit certain classes of international disputes to the jurisdiction of that Court. The declaration to that effect will be laid before you.</p>

<p>Notice of withdrawal from the Customs Agreement between the Union and the Rhodesias having been given by the Southern Rhodesian Government a Conference between representatives of the respective Governments was held in September last with a view to exploring the possibilities of a revised agreement, but it was then found to be impossible to arrive at an agreement in the matter. Arrangements have, however, been made for a further conference at the end of this month to review the position, and it is hoped that a way out of the difficulty may be found.</p>

<p>In consequence of certain developments rendering it possible, the administration of the Caprivi strip, a portion of the Mandated Territory of South-West Africa, was taken over as from the 1st of September, 1929, by the Administration of South-West Africa from the Administration of the Bechuanaland Protectorate, which had administered that part of the Mandated Territory on behalf of the Union Government since the 1st of January, 1921. I avail myself of this opportunity to express the thanks of my Ministers to His Majesty&#x2019;s Government in the United Kingdom for the valuable services rendered in this connection to the Union.</p>

<p>It is pleasing to record that the country has enjoyed beneficial rains, and that, despite the serious falling price-level of wool and certain other products, the agricultural prospects, generally speaking, are good. Legislative proposals will be laid before you dealing with various subjects in connection with agriculture, notably to assist the dairy industry, to improve the cattle industry, and to amend the existing laws in regard to animal diseases and co-operation.</p>

<p>You will be asked to consider Bills with regard to various irrigation matters and to pass legislation to amend the Irrigation Act, to provide means for subsidising approved irrigation schemes and further facilities in connection with boring operations on farms.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding the disturbed state of the diamond market, the position of the mining and secondary industries of the Union on the whole is satisfactory, and is showing continued and steady progress, expansion and increasing employment.</p>

<p>The report of the Road Motor Competition Commission appointed by the Government has been received, and will be placed before Parliament, and legislation in connection with this important matter will be submitted to you.</p>

<p>While the Industrial Laws of the country have, on the whole, operated beneficially during the last few years, in the settlement of disputes between employers and employees, and in the improvement of conditions of employment without disturbance of industrial peace, experience in administration has shown that amendment of these laws is required so that they may more effectively fulfil the function for which they were designed. Legislation will be introduced for this purpose.</p>

<p>In order to enable Natives to make better use of their lands and to ameliorate conditions arising from overstocking of native areas, it has been decided to increase the number of agricultural schools, where native demonstrators can be trained to instruct Natives in better methods of agriculture and farming.</p>

<p>It is felt that there is not sufficient provision in existing laws for adequately dealing with ill-disposed persons who instigate feelings <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0071"/>of hostility between the European and other inhabitants of the Union. Proposals with regard to this matter will accordingly be laid before you. Bills will also be introduced to make provision for various matters affecting Natives in Urban and Rural areas.</p>

<p>It is the intention to convene, at an early stage in this Session, a combined sitting of the two Houses of Parliament for the consideration of a Bill dealing with the question of the representation of Natives in Parliament.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the House of Assembly:</p>

<p>Additional Estimates of Expenditure for the present financial year and Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</p>

<p>Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Senate:</p>

<p>Me. Speaker and Gentlemen of the House of Assembly:</p>

<p>In commending these matters to your consideration, I pray that the Blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours.</p>

<p>In His Majesty&#x2019;s name I now declare this the Second Session of the Sixth Parliament of the Union of South Africa to be duly opened.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_king&#x2019;s_illness">

<heading>THE KING&#x2019;S ILLNESS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER read a letter from his Excellency the Governor-General as follows&#x2014;</p>

<p>Governor-General&#x2019;s Office, Pretoria, 8th October, 1929.</p>

<p>The Hon. the Speaker of the House of Assembly, Cape Town.</p>

<p>Sir,&#x2014;I have to inform you that the address adopted by the Senate and the House of Assembly in July last regarding the illness of his Majesty the King has been submitted to his Majesty, who has commanded that the following reply may be communicated to both Houses: (<i>begins</i>) I have been deeply touched by terms of Address presented by the Senate and the House of Assembly of the Union of South Africa. The Queen and I have read with great pleasure the expression of thankfulness and loyal devotion which it contains. I send my grateful thanks to the members of both Houses and to all my people of the Union of South Africa whose messages of sympathy and affection have cheered me during my illness and convalescence. George R. (<i>ends</i>).&#x2014;I am, sir, Your obedient servant,</p>

<p>ATHLONE, Governor-General.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#condolence">

<heading>CONDOLENCE.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House places on record its deep regret at the loss sustained through the death, on the 19th November, 1929, of Sir William Macintosh, Kt., member for the electoral division of Port Elizabeth (South), who, in addition to his services as a member of the Union Parliament from 1915 to the date of his death, was a member of the Cape House of Assembly from 1905 to 1910, and who rendered distinguished public service to the Union of South Africa; and resolves that an expression of sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased gentleman in their bereavement.</block>

<p>I think we have all met to-day under the strong feeling that the House, since it adjourned in August last, has received a severe blow. It has never vet occurred in the history of this House, nor ever, I even believe, in a gathering of so small a number of members as we are, that no less than three members have passed away within six months. Amongst the three is Sir William Macintosh, who&#x2014;I think that I can say this without fearing that a single hon. member would differ&#x2014;notwithstanding the fact that he was a fighter who gave many blows, and also had to take many, was always a man who, as soon as the strife was over, was a true friend, and certainly a man who with heart and soul always looked after the public duties which he from time to time took upon himself. Sir William Macintosh was a person in public life who was known in nearly every department. In Port Elizabeth he was head of the town more than once. More than once, too, he was the head of the mercantile community. In the interests of the State he was the representative first of the old Cape Government and subsequently of the Union Government. He represented the Government at customs conferences in the old days of the Cape Government, and, subsequently, we know that the Prime Minister took him to London in 1923 to serve as financial and industrial adviser at the two imperial conferences which we then held. I do not think any one of us, when he left in August, thought that that would be the last time we would see him in this House, although everyone knew of the suffering he had had to endure since his illness about six years ago. He was a man for whom I always had the highest feeling of friendship, and one who always showed that it was his desire to advance the interests of South Africa, and it is in that spirit that I propose the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>I second the motion and associate myself with those on this side of the House with what he has said. This is not the time now to think of Sir William Macintosh as the friend we have lost, but rather to think of the services he has rendered to South Africa and of his devotion to public duty. We often hear it said that our leaders of business, commerce and industry in this country do not give enough of their time to assisting in public affairs, but find themselves too much engrossed in their own business to give the necessary attention to the affairs of the country. Sir William is a notable exception. Early in his career he felt the call of public duty, and <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0072"/>right throughout to the very end he answered that call: he may be said to have died in harness. From 1905 onwards, as the Prime Minister has said, he has a record of parliamentary service, and has served on many bodies and commissions of various sorts, always with the intention of improving the condition of affairs in South Africa, and its interests. He never put party before country and personalities before principles. Both sides of the House will miss for a long time his wise counsel, always willingly given, his experience of finance and commerce, his wide knowledge of the affairs of the country, and the ready help he always extended to those who needed his advice and counsel, his wide and tolerant outlook on affairs. But we shall be richer and better for the example he set, his devotion to public duty and to the interests of the country.</p>

<p>Agreed to unanimously, all members standing.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House places on record its deep regret at the loss sustained through the death, on the 31st August, 1929, of Mr. Lourens Geldenhuys, member for the electoral division of Johannesburg (North), who served continuously as a member of the Union Parliament from its inception to the date of his death, and who was formerly a member of the Tweede Volksraad of the South African Republic, and in expressing appreciation of the services rendered by him to South Africa, resolves to convey to the relatives of the late member its sincere sympathy with them in their bereavement.</block>

<p>I think that is what the House has always felt about the late hon. member, who, I think, also died quite unexpectedly, is what we have always heard in the House, even when the biggest fights were in progress between the supporters of the Government and the Opposition. Although our deceased friend came in for his full share of attacks, it never occurred but that immediately after the debate, or even whilst still in progress, he was spoken to as &#x201C;Oom Louw.&#x201D; Oom Louw he always remained to everybody, and that is possibly a proof of the deep friendship there is on such occasions, even when there is a heavy fight on in the House. The deceased was one who could be called a pioneer in our country; he was one of the Johannesburg pioneers; one of the oldest inhabitants there, and Johannesburg found him installed there. In the days of the old republic he was a member of the Second Chamber. He had the confidence of the Government of the day and he was present at the last secret session before the outbreak of the second war of independence. He became a member of this House in 1910, and I feel that we shall all miss him now that he has been taken away. We all feel that there was an association between the deceased and ourselves which compels us, on this occasion, to pass a motion of deep sympathy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to join the Prime Minister and heartily second this motion and endorse the sympathetic words he has spoken. It is almost incomprehensible to think that the deceased has been taken away from us during, these few months. I think it was in September, after the last session, when he was still full of the zest of life, and shortly thereafter he was snatched away from our midst. It is a great loss to us, both personally and in public life. In many respects he was a typical South African, conservative and strict in principle. He was never ashamed of his opinions, and that was probably the power of his friendship about which the Prime Minister spoke. He kept nothing back, and yet, when he expressed his opinion, he made no enemies. There was another characteristic which he possessed, which helped him in his public life, and that was his deep sense of religion. Whenever any social question was debated in the House he always tested the merits of the matter by his religion. His public life was a life of service to his fatherland&#x2014; surely the best thing that a man, who is a patriot, can do on behalf of his country. I think the example of our late friend will not only live amongst his colleagues, but will also benefit wider circles in South Africa. I associate myself with the Prime Minister in supporting the motion.</p>

<p>Agreed to unanimously, all members standing.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House places on record its deep-regret at the loss sustained through the death, on the 20th December. 1929, of Brigadier-General William Arnott, C.M.G., member for the electoral division of Natal Coast from 1924 to 1929, and in expressing its appreciation of the services rendered by him to South Africa, resolves to convey to the relatives of the late member its sincere sympathy with them in their bereavement.</block>

<p>Here we are concerned with an hon. member whom we can, perhaps, still call one of the younger members of the House. While both the others had had a parliamentary career behind them of about twenty years, his period of service has only amounted to four or five years, but, notwithstanding that, I think he was one of those quiet members whom it was difficult to get into contact with, yet not one of us in the House will soon forget his personality. I always felt when I came into touch with Brig.-Gen. Arnott that there was great generosity in his personality which sometimes made me think: well, a soldier&#x2019;s career was the last occupation for this man. He always struck me as being more in his true vocation which he followed during recent years, namely, that of a farmer. I believe that he spoke in the House during the last few years as a farmer, a man, and as a member of the House, and we feel that someone has gone who has left something behind which we shall bear in mind for a long time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>I second the motion and endorse what the Prime Minister has said. I am sure that very few of us, when we parted <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0073"/>at the end of last session, could have thought that we were not to see again the face of our genial friend Brig.-Gen. Arnott. He was a man who had many friends, and, so far as I know, no enemies. He had that kindliness of disposition which the Prime Minister has mentioned, which endeared him to everyone with whom he came into contact. From the parliamentary point of view he was, as the Prime Minister has said, a young man. His parliamentary age was a short one; but long before he came into parliament he had done much for his country, for that part of South Africa to which he belonged. He had served in her wars, and, as the Prime Minister has said, his outlook was not that of the soldier; still, he did good service when the call came. But his real interests lay on the land and in the promotion of the cattle-breeding industry. That is where his real interests lay. I believe he regarded his parliamentary work as a means to further the development and the improvement of the cattle-breeding industry of South Africa. He believed not in words so much as in work. He talked but seldom, and, as a rule, only when it had some bearing on the subject nearest his heart. He was a man in whose mind and spirit there was no room for personal bitternesses; he believed in co-operation for the common good of the country, and the work that he has done in that respect will be remembered. We shall all miss his presence, and regret that he has been taken from us.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#robinson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROBINSON</person>:</from>

<p>I desire to associate myself most sincerely with the remarks that have fallen from the hon. the Prime Minister and the hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan). I feel that I must say a few words on this occasion, because, not only have I lost a colleague, but I have lost a friend of over thirty years&#x2019; standing. The services of Brig.-Gen. Arnott, both as a soldier and as a farmer, have been alluded to, and it has also been stated that he was a man who spoke infrequently in this House and that he was only here for a short period. During the twenty years since Union, a number of distinguished members have passed away; some of them were marked by their humaneness, geniality and general bonhomie. There have been altogether, since Union, half-a-dozen members who will long be remembered for the possession of these traits. Brig.-Gen. Arnott will be one of those whose memory will be kept green by the remembrance of these endearing qualities. A more genial and generous man I have never met; he was a prime favourite on both sides of the House. When he spoke, which he did rarely, you could always hear his voice, and it is hard to believe that we shall never hear that stentorian voice again. I sincerely associate myself with the remarks that have fallen from the previous speakers.</p>

<p>Agreed to unanimously, all members standing.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1930-01-17T17:00:00">5 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

